old you. They let us out early. They let the whole--" 
 "You did get kicked out! You did!" old Phoebe said. Then she hit me on the leg
with her fist. She gets very fisty when she feels like it. "You did! Oh, Holden!" She had
her hand on her mouth and all. She gets very emotional, I swear to God.
 "Who said I got kicked out? Nobody said I--"
 "You did. You did," she said. Then she smacked me again with her fist. If you
don't think that hurts, you're crazy. "Daddy'll kill you!" she said. Then she flopped on her
stomach on the bed and put the goddam pillow over her head. She does that quite
frequently. She's a true madman sometimes.
 "Cut it out, now," I said. "Nobody's gonna kill me. Nobody's gonna even--C'mon,
Phoeb, take that goddam thing off your head. Nobody's gonna kill me."
 She wouldn't take it off, though. You can't make her do something if she doesn't
want to. All she kept saying was, "Daddy s gonna kill you." You could hardly understand
her with that goddam pillow over her head.
 "Nobody's gonna kill me. Use your head. In the first place, I'm going away. What
I may do, I may get a job on a ranch or something for a while. I know this guy whose
grandfather's got a ranch in Colorado. I may get a job out there," I said. "I'll keep in touch
with you and all when I'm gone, if I go. C'mon. Take that off your head. C'mon, hey,
Phoeb. Please. Please, willya?'
 She wouldn t take it off, though I tried pulling it off, but she's strong as hell. You
get tired fighting with her. Boy, if she wants to keep a pillow over her head, she keeps it.
"Phoebe, please. C'mon outa there," I kept saying. "C'mon, hey . . . Hey, Weatherfield.
C'mon out."
 She wouldn't come out, though. You can't even reason with her sometimes.
Finally, I got up and went out in the living room and got some cigarettes out of the box
on the table and stuck some in my pocket. I was all out.
22
 When I came back, she had the pillow off her head all right--I knew she would--
but she still wouldn't look at me, even though she was laying on her back and all. When I
came around the side of the bed and sat down again, she turned her crazy face the other
way. She was ostracizing the hell out of me. Just like the fencing team at Pencey when I
left all the goddam foils on the subway.
 "How's old Hazel Weatherfield?" I said. "You write any new stories about her? I
got that one you sent me right in my suitcase. It's down at the station. It's very good."
 "Daddy'll kill you."
 Boy, she really gets something on her mind when she gets something on her mind.
 "No, he won't. The worst he'll do, he'll give me hell again, and then he'll send me
to that goddam military school. That's all he'll do to me. And in the first place, I won't
even be around. I'll be away. I'll be--I'll probably be in Colorado on this ranch."
 "Don't make me laugh. You can't even ride a horse."
 "Who can't? Sure I can. Certainly I can. They can teach you in about two
minutes," I said. "Stop picking at that." She was picking at that adhesive tape on her arm.
"Who gave you that haircut?" I asked her. I just noticed what a stupid haircut somebody
gave her. It was way too short. 
 "None of your business," she said. She can be very snotty sometimes. She can be
quite snotty. "I suppose you failed in every single subject again," she said--very snotty. It
was sort of funny, too, in a way. She sounds like a goddam schoolteacher sometimes, and
she's only a little child.
 "No, I didn't," I said. "I passed English." Then, just for the hell of it, I gave her a
pinch on the behind. It was sticking way out in the breeze, the way she was laying on her
side. She has hardly any behind. I didn't do it hard, but she tried to hit my hand anyway,
but she missed.
 Then all of a sudden, she said, "Oh, why did you do it?" She meant why did I get
the ax again. It made me sort of sad, the way she said it.
 "Oh, God, Phoebe, don't ask me. I'm sick of everybody asking me that," I said. "A
million reasons why. It was one of the worst schools I ever went to. It was full of
phonies. And mean guys. You never saw so many mean guys in your life. For instance, if
you were having a bull session in somebody's room, and somebody wanted to come in,
nobody'd let them in if they were some dopey, pimply guy. Everybody was always
locking their door when somebody wanted to come in. And they had this goddam secret
fraternity that I was too yellow not to join. There was this one pimply, boring guy, Robert
Ackley, that wanted to get in. He kept trying to join, and they wouldn't let him. Just
because he was boring and pimply. I don't even feel like talking about it. It was a stinking
school. Take my word."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything, but she was listen ing. I could tell by the back of
her neck that she was listening. She always listens when you tell her something. And the
funny part is she knows, half the time, what the hell you're talking about. She really does.
 I kept talking about old Pencey. I sort of felt like it.
 "Even the couple of nice teachers on the faculty, they were phonies, too," I said.
"There was this one old guy, Mr. Spencer. His wife was always giving you hot chocolate
and all that stuff, and they were really pretty nice. But you should've seen him when the
headmaster, old Thurmer, came in the history class and sat down in the back of the room.
He was always coming in and sitting down in the back of the room for about a half an
hour. He was supposed to be incognito or something. After a while, he'd be sitting back
there and then he'd start interrupting what old Spencer was saying to crack a lot of corny
jokes. Old Spencer'd practically kill himself chuckling and smiling and all, like as if
Thurmer was a goddam prince or something."
 "Don't swear so much."
 "It would've made you puke, I swear it would," I said. "Then, on Veterans' Day.
They have this day, Veterans' Day, that all the jerks that graduated from Pencey around
1776 come back and walk all over the place, with their wives and children and
everybody. You should've seen this one old guy that was about fifty. What he did was, he
came in our room and knocked on the door and asked us if we'd mind if he used the
bathroom. The bathroom was at the end of the corridor--I don't know why the hell he
asked us. You know what he said? He said he wanted to see if his initials were still in one
of the can doors. What he did, he carved his goddam stupid sad old initials in one of the
can doors about ninety years ago, and he wanted to see if they were still there. So my
roommate and I walked him down to the bathroom and all, and we had to stand there
while he looked for his initials in all the can doors. He kept talking to us the whole time,
telling us how when he was at Pencey they were the happiest days of his life, and giving 
us a lot of advice for the future and all. Boy, did he depress me! I don't mean he was a
bad guy--he wasn't. But you don't have to be a bad guy to depress somebody--you can be
a good guy and do it. All you have to do to depress somebody is give them a lot of phony
advice while you're looking for your initials in some can door--that's all you have to do. I
don't know. Maybe it wouldn't have been so bad if he hadn't been all out of breath. He
was all out of breath from just climbing up the stairs, and the whole time he was looking
for his initials he kept breathing hard, with his nostrils all funny and sad, while he kept
telling Stradlater and I to get all we could out of Pencey. God, Phoebe! I can't explain. I
just didn't like anything that was happening at Pencey. I can't explain."
 Old Phoebe said something then, but I couldn't hear her. She had the side of her
mouth right smack on the pillow, and I couldn't hear her.
 "What?" I said. "Take your mouth away. I can't hear you with your mouth that
way."
 "You don't like anything that's happening."
 It made me even more depressed when she said that.
 "Yes I do. Yes I do. Sure I do. Don't say that. Why the hell do you say that?"
 "Because you don't. You don't like any schools. You don't like a million things.
You don't."
 "I do! That's where you're wrong--that's exactly where you're wrong! Why the
hell do you have to say that?" I said. Boy, was she depressing me.
 "Because you don't," she said. "Name one thing."
 "One thing? One thing I like?" I said. "Okay."
 The trouble was, I couldn't concentrate too hot. Sometimes it's hard to
concentrate.
 "One thing I like a lot you mean?" I asked her.
 She didn't answer me, though. She was in a cockeyed position way the hell over
the other side of the bed. She was about a thousand miles away. "C'mon answer me," I
said. "One thing I like a lot, or one thing I just like?"
 "You like a lot."
 "All right," I said. But the trouble was, I couldn't concentrate. About all I could
think of were those two nuns that went around collecting dough in those beatup old straw
baskets. Especially the one with the glasses with those iron rims. And this boy I knew at
Elkton Hills. There was this one boy at Elkton Hills, named James Castle, that wouldn't
take back something he said about this very conceited boy, Phil Stabile. James Castle
called him a very conceited guy, and one of Stabile's lousy friends went and squealed on
him to Stabile. So Stabile, with about six other dirty bastards, went down to James
Castle's room and went in and locked the goddam door and tried to make him take back
what he said, but he wouldn't do it. So they started in on him. I won't even tell you what
they did to him--it's too repulsive--but he still wouldn't take it back, old James Castle.
And you should've seen him. He was a skinny little weak-looking guy, with wrists about
as big as pencils. Finally, what he did, instead of taking back what he said, he jumped out
the window. I was in the shower and all, and even I could hear him land outside. But I
just thought something fell out the window, a radio or a desk or something, not a boy or
anything. Then I heard everybody running through the corridor and down the stairs, so I
put on my bathrobe and I ran downstairs too, and there was old James Castle laying right
on the stone steps and all. He was dead, and his teeth, and blood, were all over the place, 
and nobody would even go near him. He had on this turtleneck sweater I'd lent him. All
they did with the guys that were in the room with him was expel them. They didn't even
go to jail.
 That was about all I could think of, though. Those two nuns I saw at breakfast and
this boy James Castle I knew at Elkton Hills. The funny part is, I hardly even know
James Castle, if you want to know the truth. He was one of these very quiet guys. He was
in my math class, but he was way over on the other side of the room, and he hardly ever
got up to recite or go to the blackboard or anything. Some guys in school hardly ever get
up to recite or go to the blackboard. I think the only time I ever even had a conversation
with him was that time he asked me if he could borrow this turtleneck sweater I had. I
damn near dropped dead when he asked me, I was so surprised and all. I remember I was
brushing my teeth, in the can, when he asked me. He said his cousin was coming in to
take him for a drive and all. I didn't even know he knew I had a turtleneck sweater. All I
knew about him was that his name was always right ahead of me at roll call. Cabel, R.,
Cabel, W., Castle, Caulfield--I can still remember it. If you want to know the truth, I
almost didn't lend him my sweater. Just because I didn't know him too well.
 "What?" I said to old Phoebe. She said something to me, but I didn't hear her.
 "You can't even think of one thing."
 "Yes, I can. Yes, I can."
 "Well, do it, then."
 "I like Allie," I said. "And I like doing what I'm doing right now. Sitting here with
you, and talking, and thinking about stuff, and--"
 "Allie's dead--You always say that! If somebody's dead and everything, and in
Heaven, then it isn't really--"
 "I know he's dead! Don't you think I know that? I can still like him, though, can't
I? Just because somebody's dead, you don't just stop liking them, for God's sake--
especially if they were about a thousand times nicer than the people you know that're
alive and all."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything. When she can't think of anything to say, she
doesn't say a goddam word.
 "Anyway, I like it now," I said. "I mean right now. Sitting here with you and just
chewing the fat and horsing--"
 "That isn't anything really!"
 "It is so something really! Certainly it is! Why the hell isn't it? People never think
anything is anything really. I'm getting goddam sick of it,"
 "Stop swearing. All right, name something else. Name something you'd like to be.
Like a scientist. Or a lawyer or something."
 "I couldn't be a scientist. I'm no good in science."
 "Well, a lawyer--like Daddy and all."
 "Lawyers are all right, I guess--but it doesn't appeal to me," I said. "I mean they're
all right if they go around saving innocent guys' lives all the time, and like that, but you
don't do that kind of stuff if you're a lawyer. All you do is make a lot of dough and play
golf and play bridge and buy cars and drink Martinis and look like a hot-shot. And
besides. Even if you did go around saving guys' lives and all, how would you know if you
did it because you really wanted to save guys' lives, or because you did it because what
you really wanted to do was be a terrific lawyer, with everybody slapping you on the 
back and congratulating you in court when the goddam trial was over, the reporters and
everybody, the way it is in the dirty movies? How would you know you weren't being a
phony? The trouble is, you wouldn't."
 I'm not too sure old Phoebe knew what the hell I was talking about. I mean she's
only a little child and all. But she was listening, at least. If somebody at least listens, it's
not too bad.
 "Daddy's going to kill you. He's going to kill you," she said.
 I wasn't listening, though. I was thinking about something else--something crazy.
"You know what I'd like to be?" I said. "You know what I'd like to be? I mean if I had my
goddam choice?"
 "What? Stop swearing."
 "You know that song 'If a body catch a body comin' through the rye'? I'd like--"
 "It's 'If a body meet a body coming through the rye'!" old Phoebe said. "It's a
poem. By Robert Burns."
 "I know it's a poem by Robert Burns."
 She was right, though. It is "If a body meet a body coming through the rye." I
didn't know it then, though.
 "I thought it was 'If a body catch a body,'" I said. "Anyway, I keep picturing all
these little kids playing some game in this big field of rye and all. Thousands of little
kids, and nobody's around--nobody big, I mean--except me. And I'm standing on the edge
of some crazy cliff. What I have to do, I have to catch everybody if they start to go over
the cliff--I mean if they're running and they don't look where they're going I have to come
out from somewhere and catch them. That's all I'd do all day. I'd just be the catcher in the
rye and all. I know it's crazy, but that's the only thing I'd really like to be. I know it's
crazy."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything for a long time. Then, when she said something,
all she said was, "Daddy's going to kill you."
 "I don't give a damn if he does," I said. I got up from the bed then, because what I
wanted to do, I wanted to phone up this guy that was my English teacher at Elkton Hills,
Mr. Antolini. He lived in New York now. He quit Elkton Hills. He took this job teaching
English at N.Y.U. "I have to make a phone call," I told Phoebe. "I'll be right back. Don't
go to sleep." I didn't want her to go to sleep while I was in the living room. I knew she
wouldn't but I said it anyway, just to make sure.
 While I was walking toward the door, old Phoebe said, "Holden!" and I turned
around.
 She was sitting way up in bed. She looked so pretty. "I'm taking belching lessons
from this girl, Phyllis Margulies," she said. "Listen."
 I listened, and I heard something, but it wasn't much. "Good," I said. Then I went
out in the living room and called up this teacher I had, Mr. Antolini.
23
 I made it very snappy on the phone because I was afraid my parents would barge
in on me right in the middle of it. They didn't, though. Mr. Antolini was very nice. He
said I could come right over if I wanted to. I think I probably woke he and his wife up, 
because it took them a helluva long time to answer the phone. The first thing he asked me
was if anything was wrong, and I said no. I said I'd flunked out of Pencey, though. I
thought I might as well tell him. He said "Good God," when I said that. He had a good
sense of humor and all. He told me to come right over if I felt like it.
 He was about the best teacher I ever had, Mr. Antolini. He was a pretty young
guy, not much older than my brother D.B., and you could kid around with him without
losing your respect for him. He was the one that finally picked up that boy that jumped
out the window I told you about, James Castle. Old Mr. Antolini felt his pulse and all,
and then he took off his coat and put it over James Castle and carried him all the way
over to the infirmary. He didn't even give a damn if his coat got all bloody.
 When I got back to D.B.'s room, old Phoebe'd turned the radio on. This dance
music was coming out. She'd turned it on low, though, so the maid wouldn't hear it. You
should've seen her. She was sitting smack in the middle of the bed, outside the covers,
with her legs folded like one of those Yogi guys. She was listening to the music. She kills
me.
 "C'mon," I said. "You feel like dancing?" I taught her how to dance and all when
she was a tiny little kid. She's a very good dancer. I mean I just taught her a few things.
She learned it mostly by herself. You can't teach somebody how to really dance.
 "You have shoes on," she said.
 "I'll take 'em off. C'mon."
 She practically jumped off the bed, and then she waited while I took my shoes off,
and then I danced with her for a while. She's really damn good. I don't like people that
dance with little kids, because most of the time it looks terrible. I mean if you're out at a
restaurant somewhere and you see some old guy take his little kid out on the dance floor.
Usually they keep yanking the kid's dress up in the back by mistake, and the kid can't
dance worth a damn anyway, and it looks terrible, but I don't do it out in public with
Phoebe or anything. We just horse around in the house. It's different with her anyway,
because she can dance. She can follow anything you do. I mean if you hold her in close
as hell so that it doesn't matter that your legs are so much longer. She stays right with
you. You can cross over, or do some corny dips, or even jitterbug a little, and she stays
right with you. You can even tango, for God's sake.
 We danced about four numbers. In between numbers she's funny as hell. She stays
right in position. She won't even talk or anything. You both have to stay right in position
and wait for the orchestra to start playing again. That kills me. You're not supposed to
laugh or anything, either.
 Anyway, we danced about four numbers, and then I turned off the radio. Old
Phoebe jumped back in bed and got under the covers. "I'm improving, aren't I?" she
asked me.
 "And how," I said. I sat down next to her on the bed again. I was sort of out of
breath. I was smoking so damn much, I had hardly any wind. She wasn't even out of
breath.
 "Feel my forehead," she said all of a sudden.
 "Why?"
 "Feel it. Just feel it once."
 I felt it. I didn't feel anything, though.
 "Does it feel very feverish?" she said. 
 "No. Is it supposed to?"
 "Yes--I'm making it. Feel it again."
 I felt it again, and I still didn't feel anything, but I said, "I think it's starting to,
now." I didn't want her to get a goddam inferiority complex.
 She nodded. "I can make it go up to over the thermoneter."
 "Thermometer. Who said so?"
 "Alice Holmborg showed me how. You cross your legs and hold your breath and
think of something very, very hot. A radiator or something. Then your whole forehead
gets so hot you can burn somebody's hand."
 That killed me. I pulled my hand away from her forehead, like I was in terrific
danger. "Thanks for telling me," I said.
 "Oh, I wouldn't've burned your hand. I'd've stopped before it got too--Shhh!"
Then, quick as hell, she sat way the hell up in bed.
 She scared hell out of me when she did that. "What's the matter?" I said.
 "The front door!" she said in this loud whisper. "It's them!"
 I quick jumped up and ran over and turned off the light over the desk. Then I
jammed out my cigarette on my shoe and put it in my pocket. Then I fanned hell out of
the air, to get the smoke out--I shouldn't even have been smoking, for God's sake. Then I
grabbed my shoes and got in the closet and shut the door. Boy, my heart was beating like
a bastard.
 I heard my mother come in the room.
 "Phoebe?" she said. "Now, stop that. I saw the light, young lady."
 "Hello!" I heard old Phoebe say. "I couldn't sleep. Did you have a good time?"
 "Marvelous," my mother said, but you could tell she didn't mean it. She doesn't
enjoy herself much when she goes out. "Why are you awake, may I ask? Were you warm
enough?"
 "I was warm enough, I just couldn't sleep."
 "Phoebe, have you been smoking a cigarette in here? Tell me the truth, please,
young lady."
 "What?" old Phoebe said.
 "You heard me."
 "I just lit one for one second. I just took one puff. Then I threw it out the
window."
 "Why, may I ask?"
 "I couldn't sleep."
 "I don't like that, Phoebe. I don't like that at all," my mother said. "Do you want
another blanket?"
 "No, thanks. G'night!" old Phoebe said. She was trying to get rid of her, you could
tell.
 "How was the movie?" my mother said.
 "Excellent. Except Alice's mother. She kept leaning over and asking her if she felt
grippy during the whole entire movie. We took a taxi home."
 "Let me feel your forehead."
 "I didn't catch anything. She didn't have anything. It was just her mother."
 "Well. Go to sleep now. How was your dinner?"
 "Lousy," Phoebe said. 
 "You heard what your father said about using that word. What was lousy about it?
You had a lovely lamb chop. I walked all over Lexington Avenue just to--"
 "The lamb chop was all right, but Charlene always breathes on me whenever she
puts something down. She breathes all over the food and everything. She breathes on
everything."
 "Well. Go to sleep. Give Mother a kiss. Did you say your prayers?"
 "I said them in the bathroom. G'night!"
 "Good night. Go right to sleep now. I have a splitting headache," my mother said.
She gets headaches quite frequently. She really does.
 "Take a few aspirins," old Phoebe said. "Holden'll be home on Wednesday, won't
he?"
 "So far as I know. Get under there, now. Way down."
 I heard my mother go out and close the door. I waited a couple of minutes. Then I
came out of the closet. I bumped smack into old Phoebe when I did it, because it was so
dark and she was out of bed and coming to tell me. "I hurt you?" I said. You had to
whisper now, because they were both home. "I gotta get a move on," I said. I found the
edge of the bed in the dark and sat down on it and started putting on my shoes. I was
pretty nervous. I admit it.
 "Don't go now," Phoebe whispered. "Wait'll they're asleep!"
 "No. Now. Now's the best time," I said. "She'll be in the bathroom and Daddy'll
turn on the news or something. Now's the best time." I could hardly tie my shoelaces, I
was so damn nervous. Not that they would've killed me or anything if they'd caught me
home, but it would've been very unpleasant and all. "Where the hell are ya?" I said to old
Phoebe. It was so dark I couldn't see her.
 "Here." She was standing right next to me. I didn't even see her.
 "I got my damn bags at the station," I said. "Listen. You got any dough, Phoeb?
I'm practically broke."
 "Just my Christmas dough. For presents and all. I haven't done any shopping at all
yet."
 "Oh." I didn't want to take her Christmas dough.
 "You want some?" she said.
 "I don't want to take your Christmas dough."
 "I can lend you some," she said. Then I heard her over at D.B.'s desk, opening a
million drawers and feeling around with her hand. It was pitch-black, it was so dark in the
room. "If you go away, you won't see me in the play," she said. Her voice sounded funny
when she said it.
 "Yes, I will. I won't go way before that. You think I wanna miss the play?" I said.
"What I'll do, I'll probably stay at Mr. Antolini's house till maybe Tuesday night. Then I'll
come home. If I get a chance, I'll phone ya."
 "Here," old Phoebe said. She was trying to give me the dough, but she couldn't
find my hand.
 "Where?"
 She put the dough in my hand.
 "Hey, I don't need all this," I said. "Just give me two bucks, is all. No kidding--
Here." I tried to give it back to her, but she wouldn't take it.
 "You can take it all. You can pay me back. Bring it to the play." 
 "How much is it, for God's sake?"
 "Eight dollars and eighty-five cents. Sixty-five cents. I spent some."
 Then, all of a sudden, I started to cry. I couldn't help it. I did it so nobody could
hear me, but I did it. It scared hell out of old Phoebe when I started doing it, and she
came over and tried to make me stop, but once you get started, you can't just stop on a
goddam dime. I was still sitting on the edge of the bed when I did it, and she put her old
arm around my neck, and I put my arm around her, too, but I still couldn't stop for a long
time. I thought I was going to choke to death or something. Boy, I scared hell out of poor
old Phoebe. The damn window was open and everything, and I could feel her shivering
and all, because all she had on was her pajamas. I tried to make her get back in bed, but
she wouldn't go. Finally I stopped. But it certainly took me a long, long time. Then I
finished buttoning my coat and all. I told her I'd keep in touch with her. She told me I
could sleep with her if I wanted to, but I said no, that I'd better beat it, that Mr. Antolini
was waiting for me and all. Then I took my hunting hat out of my coat pocket and gave it
to her. She likes those kind of crazy hats. She didn't want to take it, but I made her. I'll bet
she slept with it on. She really likes those kind of hats. Then I told her again I'd give her a
buzz if I got a chance, and then I left.
 It was a helluva lot easier getting out of the house than it was getting in, for some
reason. For one thing, I didn't give much of a damn any more if they caught me. I really
didn't. I figured if they caught me, they caught me. I almost wished they did, in a way.
 I walked all the way downstairs, instead of taking the elevator. I went down the
back stairs. I nearly broke my neck on about ten million garbage pails, but I got out all
right. The elevator boy didn't even see me. He probably still thinks I'm up at the
Dicksteins'.
24
 Mr. and Mrs. Antolini had this very swanky apartment over on Sutton Place, with
two steps that you go down to get in the living room, and a bar and all. I'd been there
quite a few times, because after I left Elkton Hills Mr. Antoilni came up to our house for
dinner quite frequently to find out how I was getting along. He wasn't married then. Then
when he got married, I used to play tennis with he and Mrs. Antolini quite frequently, out
at the West Side Tennis Club, in Forest Hills, Long Island. Mrs. Antolini, belonged there.
She was lousy with dough. She was about sixty years older than Mr. Antolini, but they
seemed to get along quite well. For one thing, they were both very intellectual, especially
Mr. Antolini except that he was more witty than intellectual when you were with him,
sort of like D.B. Mrs. Antolini was mostly serious. She had asthma pretty bad. They both
read all D.B.'s stories--Mrs. Antolini, too--and when D.B. went to Hollywood, Mr.
Antolini phoned him up and told him not to go. He went anyway, though. Mr. Antolini
said that anybody that could write like D.B. had no business going out to Hollywood.
That's exactly what I said, practically.
 I would have walked down to their house, because I didn't want to spend any of
Phoebe's Christmas dough that I didn't have to, but I felt funny when I got outside. Sort of
dizzy. So I took a cab. I didn't want to, but I did. I had a helluva time even finding a cab. 
 Old Mr. Antolini answered the door when I rang the bell--after the elevator boy
finally let me up, the bastard. He had on his bathrobe and slippers, and he had a highball
in one hand. He was a pretty sophisticated guy, and he was a pretty heavy drinker.
"Holden, m'boy!" he said. "My God, he's grown another twenty inches. Fine to see you."
 "How are you, Mr. Antolini? How's Mrs. Antolini?"
 "We're both just dandy. Let's have that coat." He took my coat off me and hung it
up. "I expected to see a day-old infant in your arms. Nowhere to turn. Snowflakes in your
eyelashes." He's a very witty guy sometimes. He turned around and yelled out to the
kitchen, "Lillian! How's the coffee coming?" Lillian was Mrs. Antolini's first name.
 "It's all ready," she yelled back. "Is that Holden? Hello, Holden!"
 "Hello, Mrs. Antolini!"
 You were always yelling when you were there. That's because the both of them
were never in the same room at the same time. It was sort of funny.
 "Sit down, Holden," Mr. Antolini said. You could tell he was a little oiled up. The
room looked like they'd just had a party. Glasses were all over the place, and dishes with
peanuts in them. "Excuse the appearance of the place," he said. "We've been entertaining
some Buffalo friends of Mrs. Antolini's . . . Some buffaloes, as a matter of fact."
 I laughed, and Mrs. Antolini yelled something in to me from the kitchen, but I
couldn't hear her. "What'd she say?" I asked Mr. Antolini.
 "She said not to look at her when she comes in. She just arose from the sack.
Have a cigarette. Are you smoking now?"
 "Thanks," I said. I took a cigarette from the box he offered me. "Just once in a
while. I'm a moderate smoker."
 "I'll bet you are," he said. He gave me a light from this big lighter off the table.
"So. You and Pencey are no longer one," he said. He always said things that way.
Sometimes it amused me a lot and sometimes it didn't. He sort of did it a little bit too
much. I don't mean he wasn't witty or anything--he was--but sometimes it gets on your
nerves when somebody's always saying things like "So you and Pencey are no longer
one." D.B. does it too much sometimes, too.
 "What was the trouble?" Mr. Antolini asked me. "How'd you do in English? I'll
show you the door in short order if you flunked English, you little ace composition
writer."
 "Oh, I passed English all right. It was mostly literature, though. I only wrote about
two compositions the whole term," I said. "I flunked Oral Expression, though. They had
this course you had to take, Oral Expression. That I flunked."
 "Why?"
 "Oh, I don't know." I didn't feel much like going into It. I was still feeling sort of
dizzy or something, and I had a helluva headache all of a sudden. I really did. But you
could tell he was interested, so I told him a little bit about it. "It's this course where each
boy in class has to get up in class and make a speech. You know. Spontaneous and all.
And if the boy digresses at all, you're supposed to yell 'Digression!' at him as fast as you
can. It just about drove me crazy. I got an F in it."
 "Why?"
 "Oh, I don't know. That digression business got on my nerves. I don't know. The
trouble with me is, I like it when somebody digresses. It's more interesting and all." 
 "You don't care to have somebody stick to the point when he tells you
something?"
 "Oh, sure! I like somebody to stick to the point and all. But I don't like them to
stick too much to the point. I don't know. I guess I don't like it when somebody sticks to
the point all the time. The boys that got the best marks in Oral Expression were the ones
that stuck to the point all the time--I admit it. But there was this one boy, Richard
Kinsella. He didn't stick to the point too much, and they were always yelling 'Digression!'
at him. It was terrible, because in the first place, he was a very nervous guy--I mean he
was a very nervous guy--and his lips were always shaking whenever it was his time to
make a speech, and you could hardly hear him if you were sitting way in the back of the
room. When his lips sort of quit shaking a little bit, though, I liked his speeches better
than anybody else's. He practically flunked the course, though, too. He got a D plus
because they kept yelling 'Digression!' at him all the time. For instance, he made this
speech about this farm his father bought in Vermont. They kept yelling 'Digression!' at
him the whole time he was making it, and this teacher, Mr. Vinson, gave him an F on it
because he hadn't told what kind of animals and vegetables and stuff grew on the farm
and all. What he did was, Richard Kinsella, he'd start telling you all about that stuff--then
all of a sudden he'd start telling you about this letter his mother got from his uncle, and
how his uncle got polio and all when he was forty-two years old, and how he wouldn't let
anybody come to see him in the hospital because he didn't want anybody to see him with
a brace on. It didn't have much to do with the farm--I admit it--but it was nice. It's nice
when somebody tells you about their uncle. Especially when they start out telling you
about their father's farm and then all of a sudden get more interested in their uncle. I
mean it's dirty to keep yelling 'Digression!' at him when he's all nice and excited. I don't
know. It's hard to explain." I didn't feel too much like trying, either. For one thing, I had
this terrific headache all of a sudden. I wished to God old Mrs. Antolini would come in
with the coffee. That's something that annoys hell out of me--I mean if somebody says
the coffee's all ready and it isn't.
 "Holden. . . One short, faintly stuffy, pedagogical question. Don't you think there's
a time and place for everything? Don't you think if someone starts out to tell you about
his father's farm, he should stick to his guns, then get around to telling you about his
uncle's brace? Or, if his uncle's brace is such a provocative subject, shouldn't he have
selected it in the first place as his subject--not the farm?"
 I didn't feel much like thinking and answering and all. I had a headache and I felt
lousy. I even had sort of a stomach-ache, if you want to know the truth.
 "Yes--I don't know. I guess he should. I mean I guess he should've picked his
uncle as a subject, instead of the farm, if that interested him most. But what I mean is,
lots of time you don't know what interests you most till you start talking about something
that doesn't interest you most. I mean you can't help it sometimes. What I think is, you're
supposed to leave somebody alone if he's at least being interesting and he's getting all
excited about something. I like it when somebody gets excited about something. It's nice.
You just didn't know this teacher, Mr. Vinson. He could drive you crazy sometimes, him
and the goddam class. I mean he'd keep telling you to unify and simplify all the time.
Some things you just can't do that to. I mean you can't hardly ever simplify and unify
something just because somebody wants you to. You didn't know this guy, Mr. Vinson. I
mean he was very intelligent and all, but you could tell he didn't have too much brains." 
 "Coffee, gentlemen, finally," Mrs. Antolini said. She came in carrying this tray
with coffee and cakes and stuff on it. "Holden, don't you even peek at me. I'm a mess."
 "Hello, Mrs. Antolini," I said. I started to get up and all, but Mr. Antolini got hold
of my jacket and pulled me back down. Old Mrs. Antolini's hair was full of those iron
curler jobs, and she didn't have any lipstick or anything on. She didn't look too gorgeous.
She looked pretty old and all.
 "I'll leave this right here. Just dive in, you two," she said. She put the tray down
on the cigarette table, pushing all these glasses out of the way. "How's your mother,
Holden?"
 "She's fine, thanks. I haven't seen her too recently, but the last I--"
 "Darling, if Holden needs anything, everything's in the linen closet. The top shelf.
I'm going to bed. I'm exhausted," Mrs. Antolini said. She looked it, too. "Can you boys
make up the couch by yourselves?"
 "We'll take care of everything. You run along to bed," Mr. Antolini said. He gave
Mrs. Antolini a kiss and she said good-by to me and went in the bedroom. They were
always kissing each other a lot in public.
 I had part of a cup of coffee and about half of some cake that was as hard as a
rock. All old Mr. Antolini had was another highball, though. He makes them strong, too,
you could tell. He may get to be an alcoholic if he doesn't watch his step.
 "I had lunch with your dad a couple of weeks ago," he said all of a sudden. "Did
you know that?"
 "No, I didn't."
 "You're aware, of course, that he's terribly concerned about you."
 "I know it. I know he is," I said.
 "Apparently before he phoned me he'd just had a long, rather harrowing letter
from your latest headmaster, to the effect that you were making absolutely no effort at all.
Cutting classes. Coming unprepared to all your classes. In general, being an all-around--"
 "I didn't cut any classes. You weren't allowed to cut any. There were a couple of
them I didn't attend once in a while, like that Oral Expression I told you about, but I
didn't cut any."
 I didn't feel at all like discussing it. The coffee made my stomach feel a little
better, but I still had this awful headache.
 Mr. Antolini lit another cigarette. He smoked like a fiend. Then he said, "Frankly,
I don't know what the hell to say to you, Holden."
 "I know. I'm very hard to talk to. I realize that."
 "I have a feeling that you're riding for some kind of a terrible, terrible fall. But I
don't honestly know what kind. . . Are you listening to me?"
 "Yes."
 You could tell he was trying to concentrate and all.
 "It may be the kind where, at the age of thirty, you sit in some bar hating
everybody who comes in looking as if he might have played football in college. Then
again, you may pick up just enough education to hate people who say, 'It's a secret
between he and I.' Or you may end up in some business office, throwing paper clips at the
nearest stenographer. I just don't know. But do you know what I'm driving at, at all?"
 "Yes. Sure," I said. I did, too. "But you're wrong about that hating business. I
mean about hating football players and all. You really are. I don't hate too many guys. 
What I may do, I may hate them for a little while, like this guy Stradlater I knew at
Pencey, and this other boy, Robert Ackley. I hated them once in a while--I admit it--but it
doesn't last too long, is what I mean. After a while, if I didn't see them, if they didn't
come in the room, or if I didn't see them in the dining room for a couple of meals, I sort
of missed them. I mean I sort of missed them."
 Mr. Antolini didn't say anything for a while. He got up and got another hunk of
ice and put it in his drink, then he sat down again. You could tell he was thinking. I kept
wishing, though, that he'd continue the conversation in the morning, instead of now, but
he was hot. People are mostly hot to have a discussion when you're not.
 "All right. Listen to me a minute now . . . I may not word this as memorably as I'd
like to, but I'll write you a letter about it in a day or two. Then you can get it all straight.
But listen now, anyway." He started concentrating again. Then he said, "This fall I think
you're riding for--it's a special kind of fall, a horrible kind. The man falling isn't permitted
to feel or hear himself hit bottom. He just keeps falling and falling. The whole
arrangement's designed for men who, at some time or other in their lives, were looking
for something their own environment couldn't supply them with. Or they thought their
own environment couldn't supply them with. So they gave up looking. They gave it up
before they ever really even got started. You follow me?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "Sure?"
 "Yes."
 He got up and poured some more booze in his glass. Then he sat down again. He
didn't say anything for a long time.
 "I don't want to scare you," he said, "but I can very clearly see you dying nobly,
one way or another, for some highly unworthy cause." He gave me a funny look. "If I
write something down for you, will you read it carefully? And keep it?"
 "Yes. Sure," I said. I did, too. I still have the paper he gave me.
 He went over to this desk on the other side of the room, and without sitting down
wrote something on a piece of paper. Then he came back and sat down with the paper in
his hand. "Oddly enough, this wasn't written by a practicing poet. It was written by a
psychoanalyst named Wilhelm Stekel. Here's what he--Are you still with me?"
 "Yes, sure I am."
 "Here's what he said: 'The mark of the immature man is that he wants to die nobly
for a cause, while the mark of the mature man is that he wants to live humbly for one.'"
 He leaned over and handed it to me. I read it right when he gave it to me, and then
I thanked him and all and put it in my pocket. It was nice of him to go to all that trouble.
It really was. The thing was, though, I didn't feel much like concentrating. Boy, I felt so
damn tired all of a sudden.
 You could tell he wasn't tired at all, though. He was pretty oiled up, for one thing.
"I think that one of these days," he said, "you're going to have to find out where you want
to go. And then you've got to start going there. But immediately. You can't afford to lose
a minute. Not you."
 I nodded, because he was looking right at me and all, but I wasn't too sure what he
was talking about. I was pretty sure I knew, but I wasn't too positive at the time. I was too
damn tired. 
 "And I hate to tell you," he said, "but I think that once you have a fair idea where
you want to go, your first move will be to apply yourself in school. You'll have to. You're
a student--whether the idea appeals to you or not. You're in love with knowledge. And I
think you'll find, once you get past all the Mr. Vineses and their Oral Comp--"
 "Mr. Vinsons," I said. He meant all the Mr. Vinsons, not all the Mr. Vineses. I
shouldn't have interrupted him, though.
 "All right--the Mr. Vinsons. Once you get past all the Mr. Vinsons, you're going
to start getting closer and closer--that is, if you want to, and if you look for it and wait for
it--to the kind of information that will be very, very dear to your heart. Among other
things, you'll find that you're not the first person who was ever confused and frightened
and even sickened by human behavior. You're by no means alone on that score, you'll be
excited and stimulated to know. Many, many men have been just as troubled morally and
spiritually as you are right now. Happily, some of them kept records of their troubles.
You'll learn from them--if you want to. Just as someday, if you have something to offer,
someone will learn something from you. It's a beautiful reciprocal arrangement. And it
isn't education. It's history. It's poetry." He stopped and took a big drink out of his
highball. Then he started again. Boy, he was really hot. I was glad I didn't try to stop him
or anything. "I'm not trying to tell you," he said, "that only educated and scholarly men
are able to contribute something valuable to the world. It's not so. But I do say that
educated and scholarly men, if they're brilliant and creative to begin with--which,
unfortunately, is rarely the case--tend to leave infinitely more valuable records behind
them than men do who are merely brilliant and creative. They tend to express themselves
more clearly, and they usually have a passion for following their thoughts through to the
end. And--most important--nine times out of ten they have more humility than the
unscholarly thinker. Do you follow me at all?"
 "Yes, sir."
 He didn't say anything again for quite a while. I don't know if you've ever done it,
but it's sort of hard to sit around waiting for somebody to say something when they're
thinking and all. It really is. I kept trying not to yawn. It wasn't that I was bored or
anything--I wasn't--but I was so damn sleepy all of a sudden.
 "Something else an academic education will do for you. If you go along with it
any considerable distance, it'll begin to give you an idea what size mind you have. What
it'll fit and, maybe, what it won't. After a while, you'll have an idea what kind of thoughts
your particular size mind should be wearing. For one thing, it may save you an
extraordinary amount of time trying on ideas that don't suit you, aren't becoming to you.
You'll begin to know your true measurements and dress your mind accordingly."
 Then, all of a sudden, I yawned. What a rude bastard, but I couldn't help it!
 Mr. Antolini just laughed, though. "C'mon," he said, and got up. "We'll fix up the
couch for you."
 I followed him and he went over to this closet and tried to take down some sheets
and blankets and stuff that was on the top shelf, but he couldn't do it with this highball
glass in his hand. So he drank it and then put the glass down on the floor and then he took
the stuff down. I helped him bring it over to the couch. We both made the bed together.
He wasn't too hot at it. He didn't tuck anything in very tight. I didn't care, though. I
could've slept standing up I was so tired.
 "How're all your women?" 
 "They're okay." I was being a lousy conversationalist, but I didn't feel like it.
 "How's Sally?" He knew old Sally Hayes. I introduced him once.
 "She's all right. I had a date with her this afternoon." Boy, it seemed like twenty
years ago! "We don't have too much in common any more."
 "Helluva pretty girl. What about that other girl? The one you told me about, in
Maine?"
 "Oh--Jane Gallagher. She's all right. I'm probably gonna give her a buzz
tomorrow."
 We were all done making up the couch then. "It's all yours," Mr. Antolini said. "I
don't know what the hell you're going to do with those legs of yours."
 "That's all right. I'm used to short beds," I said. "Thanks a lot, sir. You and Mrs.
Antolini really saved my life tonight."
 "You know where the bathroom is. If there's anything you want, just holler. I'll be
in the kitchen for a while--will the light bother you?"
 "No--heck, no. Thanks a lot."
 "All right. Good night, handsome."
 "G'night, sir. Thanks a lot."
 He went out in the kitchen and I went in the bathroom and got undressed and all. I
couldn't brush my teeth because I didn't have any toothbrush with me. I didn't have any
pajamas either and Mr. Antolini forgot to lend me some. So I just went back in the living
room and turned off this little lamp next to the couch, and then I got in bed with just my
shorts on. It was way too short for me, the couch, but I really could've slept standing up
without batting an eyelash. I laid awake for just a couple of seconds thinking about all
that stuff Mr. Antolini'd told me. About finding out the size of your mind and all. He was
really a pretty smart guy. But I couldn't keep my goddam eyes open, and I fell asleep.
 Then something happened. I don't even like to talk about it.
 I woke up all of a sudden. I don't know what time it was or anything, but I woke
up. I felt something on my head, some guy's hand. Boy, it really scared hell out of me.
What it was, it was Mr. Antolini's hand. What he was doing was, he was sitting on the
floor right next to the couch, in the dark and all, and he was sort of petting me or patting
me on the goddam head. Boy, I'll bet I jumped about a thousand feet.
 "What the hellya doing?" I said.
 "Nothing! I'm simply sitting here, admiring--"
 "What're ya doing, anyway?" I said over again. I didn't know what the hell to say-
-I mean I was embarrassed as hell.
 "How 'bout keeping your voice down? I'm simply sitting here--"
 "I have to go, anyway," I said--boy, was I nervous! I started putting on my damn
pants in the dark. I could hardly get them on I was so damn nervous. I know more damn
perverts, at schools and all, than anybody you ever met, and they're always being perverty
when I'm around.
 "You have to go where?" Mr. Antolini said. He was trying to act very goddam
casual and cool and all, but he wasn't any too goddam cool. Take my word.
 "I left my bags and all at the station. I think maybe I'd better go down and get
them. I have all my stuff in them."
 "They'll be there in the morning. Now, go back to bed. I'm going to bed myself.
What's the matter with you?" 
 "Nothing's the matter, it's just that all my money and stuff's in one of my bags. I'll
be right back. I'll get a cab and be right back," I said. Boy, I was falling all over myself in
the dark. "The thing is, it isn't mine, the money. It's my mother's, and I--"
 "Don't be ridiculous, Holden. Get back in that bed. I'm going to bed myself. The
money will be there safe and sound in the morn--"
 "No, no kidding. I gotta get going. I really do." I was damn near all dressed
already, except that I couldn't find my tie. I couldn't remember where I'd put my tie. I put
on my jacket and all without it. Old Mr. Antolini was sitting now in the big chair a little
ways away from me, watching me. It was dark and all and I couldn't see him so hot, but I
knew he was watching me, all right. He was still boozing, too. I could see his trusty
highball glass in his hand.
 "You're a very, very strange boy."
 "I know it," I said. I didn't even look around much for my tie. So I went without it.
"Good-by, sir," I said, "Thanks a lot. No kidding."
 He kept walking right behind me when I went to the front door, and when I rang
the elevator bell he stayed in the damn doorway. All he said was that business about my
being a "very, very strange boy" again. Strange, my ass. Then he waited in the doorway
and all till the goddam elevator came. I never waited so long for an elevator in my whole
goddam life. I swear.
 I didn't know what the hell to talk about while I was waiting for the elevator, and
he kept standing there, so I said, "I'm gonna start reading some good books. I really am."
I mean you had to say something. It was very embarrassing.
 "You grab your bags and scoot right on back here again. I'll leave the door
unlatched."
 "Thanks a lot," I said. "G'by!" The elevator was finally there. I got in and went
down. Boy, I was shaking like a madman. I was sweating, too. When something perverty
like that happens, I start sweating like a bastard. That kind of stuff's happened to me
about twenty times since I was a kid. I can't stand it.
25
 When I got outside, it was just getting light out. It was pretty cold, too, but it felt
good because I was sweating so much.
 I didn't know where the hell to go. I didn't want to go to another hotel and spend
all Phoebe's dough. So finally all I did was I walked over to Lexington and took the
subway down to Grand Central. My bags were there and all, and I figured I'd sleep in that
crazy waiting room where all the benches are. So that's what I did. It wasn't too bad for a
while because there weren't many people around and I could stick my feet up. But I don't
feel much like discussing it. It wasn't too nice. Don't ever try it. I mean it. It'll depress
you.
 I only slept till around nine o'clock because a million people started coming in the
waiting room and I had to take my feet down. I can't sleep so hot if I have to keep my feet
on the floor. So I sat up. I still had that headache. It was even worse. And I think I was
more depressed than I ever was in my whole life. 
 I didn't want to, but I started thinking about old Mr. Antolini and I wondered what
he'd tell Mrs. Antolini when she saw I hadn't slept there or anything. That part didn't
worry me too much, though, because I knew Mr. Antolini was very smart and that he
could make up something to tell her. He could tell her I'd gone home or something. That
part didn't worry me much. But what did worry me was the part about how I'd woke up
and found him patting me on the head and all. I mean I wondered if just maybe I was
wrong about thinking be was making a flitty pass at ne. I wondered if maybe he just liked
to pat guys on the head when they're asleep. I mean how can you tell about that stuff for
sure? You can't. I even started wondering if maybe I should've got my bags and gone
back to his house, the way I'd said I would. I mean I started thinking that even if he was a
flit he certainly'd been very nice to me. I thought how he hadn't minded it when I'd called
him up so late, and how he'd told me to come right over if I felt like it. And how he went
to all that trouble giving me that advice about finding out the size of your mind and all,
and how he was the only guy that'd even gone near that boy James Castle I told you about
when he was dead. I thought about all that stuff. And the more I thought about it, the
more depressed I got. I mean I started thinking maybe I should've gone back to his house.
Maybe he was only patting my head just for the hell of it. The more I thought about it,
though, the more depressed and screwed up about it I got. What made it even worse, my
eyes were sore as hell. They felt sore and burny from not getting too much sleep. Besides
that, I was getting sort of a cold, and I didn't even have a goddam handkerchief with me. I
had some in my suitcase, but I didn't feel like taking it out of that strong box and opening
it up right in public and all.
 There was this magazine that somebody'd left on the bench next to me, so I
started reading it, thinking it'd make me stop thinking about Mr. Antolini and a million
other things for at least a little while. But this damn article I started reading made me feel
almost worse. It was all about hormones. It described how you should look, your face and
eyes and all, if your hormones were in good shape, and I didn't look that way at all. I
looked exactly like the guy in the article with lousy hormones. So I started getting
worried about my hormones. Then I read this other article about how you can tell if you
have cancer or not. It said if you had any sores in your mouth that didn't heal pretty
quickly, it was a sign that you probably had cancer. I'd had this sore on the inside of my
lip for about two weeks. So figured I was getting cancer. That magazine was some little
cheerer upper. I finally quit reading it and went outside for a walk. I figured I'd be dead in
a couple of months because I had cancer. I really did. I was even positive I would be. It
certainly didn't make me feel too gorgeous. It'sort of looked like it was going to rain, but I
went for this walk anyway. For one thing, I figured I ought to get some breakfast. I wasn't
at all hungry, but I figured I ought to at least eat something. I mean at least get something
with some vitamins in it. So I started walking way over east, where the pretty cheap
restaurants are, because I didn't want to spend a lot of dough.
 While I was walking, I passed these two guys that were unloading this big
Christmas tree off a truck. One guy kept saying to the other guy, "Hold the sonuvabitch
up! Hold it up, for Chrissake!" It certainly was a gorgeous way to talk about a Christmas
tree. It was sort of funny, though, in an awful way, and I started to sort of laugh. It was
about the worst thing I could've done, because the minute I started to laugh I thought I
was going to vomit. I really did. I even started to, but it went away. I don't know why. I
mean I hadn't eaten anything unsanitary or like that and usually I have quite a strong 
stomach. Anyway, I got over it, and I figured I'd feel better if I had something to eat. So I
went in this very cheap-looking restaurant and had doughnuts and coffee. Only, I didn't
eat the doughnuts. I couldn't swallow them too well. The thing is, if you get very
depressed about something, it's hard as hell to swallow. The waiter was very nice,
though. He took them back without charging me. I just drank the coffee. Then I left and
started walking over toward Fifth Avenue.
 It was Monday and all, and pretty near Christmas, and all the stores were open. So
it wasn't too bad walking on Fifth Avenue. It was fairly Christmasy. All those scraggylooking
Santa Clauses were standing on corners ringing those bells, and the Salvation
Army girls, the ones that don't wear any lipstick or anything, were tinging bells too. I sort
of kept looking around for those two nuns I'd met at breakfast the day before, but I didn't
see them. I knew I wouldn't, because they'd told me they'd come to New York to be
schoolteachers, but I kept looking for them anyway. Anyway, it was pretty Christmasy all
of a sudden. A million little kids were downtown with their mothers, getting on and off
buses and coming in and out of stores. I wished old Phoebe was around. She's not little
enough any more to go stark staring mad in the toy department, but she enjoys horsing
around and looking at the people. The Christmas before last I took her downtown
shopping with me. We had a helluva time. I think it was in Bloomingdale's. We went in
the shoe department and we pretended she--old Phoebe-- wanted to get a pair of those
very high storm shoes, the kind that have about a million holes to lace up. We had the
poor salesman guy going crazy. Old Phoebe tried on about twenty pairs, and each time
the poor guy had to lace one shoe all the way up. It was a dirty trick, but it killed old
Phoebe. We finally bought a pair of moccasins and charged them. The salesman was very
nice about it. I think he knew we were horsing around, because old Phoebe always starts
giggling.
 Anyway, I kept walking and walking up Fifth Avenue, without any tie on or
anything. Then all of a sudden, something very spooky started happening. Every time I
came to the end of a block and stepped off the goddam curb, I had this feeling that I'd
never get to the other side of the street. I thought I'd just go down, down, down, and
nobody'd ever see me again. Boy, did it scare me. You can't imagine. I started sweating
like a bastard--my whole shirt and underwear and everything. Then I started doing
something else. Every time I'd get to the end of a block I'd make believe I was talking to
my brother Allie. I'd say to him, "Allie, don't let me disappear. Allie, don't let me
disappear. Allie, don't let me disappear. Please, Allie." And then when I'd reach the other
side of the street without disappearing, I'd thank him. Then it would start all over again as
soon as I got to the next corner. But I kept going and all. I was sort of afraid to stop, I
think--I don't remember, to tell you the truth. I know I didn't stop till I was way up in the
Sixties, past the zoo and all. Then I sat down on this bench. I could hardly get my breath,
and I was still sweating like a bastard. I sat there, I guess, for about an hour. Finally, what
I decided I'd do, I decided I'd go away. I decided I'd never go home again and I'd never
go away to another school again. I decided I'd just see old Phoebe and sort of say goodby
to her and all, and give her back her Christmas dough, and then I'd start hitchhiking
my way out West. What I'd do, I figured, I'd go down to the Holland Tunnel and bum a
ride, and then I'd bum another one, and another one, and another one, and in a few days
I'd be somewhere out West where it was very pretty and sunny and where nobody'd know
me and I'd get a job. I figured I could get a job at a filling station somewhere, putting gas 
and oil in people's cars. I didn't care what kind of job it was, though. Just so people didn't
know me and I didn't know anybody. I thought what I'd do was, I'd pretend I was one of
those deaf-mutes. That way I wouldn't have to have any goddam stupid useless
conversations with anybody. If anybody wanted to tell me something, they'd have to
write it on a piece of paper and shove it over to me. They'd get bored as hell doing that
after a while, and then I'd be through with having conversations for the rest of my life.
Everybody'd think I was just a poor deaf-mute bastard and they'd leave me alone. They'd
let me put gas and oil in their stupid cars, and they'd pay me a salary and all for it, and I'd
build me a little cabin somewhere with the dough I made and live there for the rest of my
life. I'd build it right near the woods, but not right in them, because I'd want it to be sunny
as hell all the time. I'd cook all my own food, and later on, if I wanted to get married or
something, I'd meet this beautiful girl that was also a deaf-mute and we'd get married.
She'd come and live in my cabin with me, and if she wanted to say anything to me, she'd
have to write it on a goddam piece of paper, like everybody else. If we had any children,
we'd hide them somewhere. We could buy them a lot of books and teach them how to
read and write by ourselves.
 I got excited as hell thinking about it. I really did. I knew the part about
pretending I was a deaf-mute was crazy, but I liked thinking about it anyway. But I really
decided to go out West and all. All I wanted to do first was say good-by to old Phoebe.
So all of a sudden, I ran like a madman across the street--I damn near got killed doing it,
if you want to know the truth--and went in this stationery store and bought a pad and
pencil. I figured I'd write her a note telling her where to meet me so I could say good-by
to her and give her back her Christmas dough, and then I'd take the note up to her school
and get somebody in the principal's office to give it to her. But I just put the pad and
pencil in my pocket and started walking fast as hell up to her school--I was too excited to
write the note right in the stationery store. I walked fast because I wanted her to get the
note before she went home for lunch, and I didn't have any too much time.
 I knew where her school was, naturally, because I went there myself when I was a
kid. When I got there, it felt funny. I wasn't sure I'd remember what it was like inside, but
I did. It was exactly the same as it was when I went there. They had that same big yard
inside, that was always sort of dark, with those cages around the light bulbs so they
wouldn't break if they got hit with a ball. They had those same white circles painted all
over the floor, for games and stuff. And those same old basketball rings without any nets-
-just the backboards and the rings.
 Nobody was around at all, probably because it wasn't recess period, and it wasn't
lunchtime yet. All I saw was one little kid, a colored kid, on his way to the bathroom. He
had one of those wooden passes sticking out of his hip pocket, the same way we used to
have, to show he had permission and all to go to the bathroom.
 I was still sweating, but not so bad any more. I went over to the stairs and sat
down on the first step and took out the pad and pencil I'd bought. The stairs had the same
smell they used to have when I went there. Like somebody'd just taken a leak on them.
School stairs always smell like that. Anyway, I sat there and wrote this note:
 DEAR PHOEBE,
 I can't wait around till Wednesday any more so I will 
 probably hitch hike out west this afternoon. Meet me at the
 Museum of art near the door at quarter past 12 if you can and I
 will give you your Christmas dough back. I didn't spend much.
 Love,
 HOLDEN
 Her school was practically right near the museum, and she had to pass it on her
way home for lunch anyway, so I knew she could meet me all right.
 Then I started walking up the stairs to the principal's office so I could give the
note to somebody that would bring it to her in her classroom. I folded it about ten times
so nobody'd open it. You can't trust anybody in a goddam school. But I knew they'd give
it to her if I was her brother and all.
 While I was walking up the stairs, though, all of a sudden I thought I was going to
puke again. Only, I didn't. I sat down for a second, and then I felt better. But while I was
sitting down, I saw something that drove me crazy. Somebody'd written "Fuck you" on
the wall. It drove me damn near crazy. I thought how Phoebe and all the other little kids
would see it, and how they'd wonder what the hell it meant, and then finally some dirty
kid would tell them--all cockeyed, naturally--what it meant, and how they'd all think
about it and maybe even worry about it for a couple of days. I kept wanting to kill
whoever'd written it. I figured it was some perverty bum that'd sneaked in the school late
at night to take a leak or something and then wrote it on the wall. I kept picturing myself
catching him at it, and how I'd smash his head on the stone steps till he was good and
goddam dead and bloody. But I knew, too, I wouldn't have the guts to do it. I knew that.
That made me even more depressed. I hardly even had the guts to rub it off the wall with
my hand, if you want to know the truth. I was afraid some teacher would catch me
rubbing it off and would think I'd written it. But I rubbed it out anyway, finally. Then I
went on up to the principal's office.
 The principal didn't seem to be around, but some old lady around a hundred years
old was sitting at a typewriter. I told her I was Phoebe Caulfield's brother, in 4B-1, and I
asked her to please give Phoebe the note. I said it was very important because my mother
was sick and wouldn't have lunch ready for Phoebe and that she'd have to meet me and
have lunch in a drugstore. She was very nice about it, the old lady. She took the note off
me and called some other lady, from the next office, and the other lady went to give it to
Phoebe. Then the old lady that was around a hundred years old and I shot the breeze for a
while, She was pretty nice, and I told her how I'd gone there to school, too, and my
brothers. She asked me where I went to school now, and I told her Pencey, and she said
Pencey was a very good school. Even if I'd wanted to, I wouldn't have had the strength to
straighten her out. Besides, if she thought Pencey was a very good school, let her think it.
You hate to tell new stuff to somebody around a hundred years old. They don't like to
hear it. Then, after a while, I left. It was funny. She yelled "Good luck!" at me the same
way old Spencer did when I left Pencey. God, how I hate it when somebody yells "Good
luck!" at me when I'm leaving somewhere. It's depressing.
 I went down by a different staircase, and I saw another "Fuck you" on the wall. I
tried to rub it off with my hand again, but this one was scratched on, with a knife or 
something. It wouldn't come off. It's hopeless, anyway. If you had a million years to do it
in, you couldn't rub out even half the "Fuck you" signs in the world. It's impossible.
 I looked at the clock in the recess yard, and it was only twenty to twelve, so I had
quite a lot of time to kill before I met old Phoebe. But I just walked over to the museum
anyway. There wasn't anyplace else to go. I thought maybe I might stop in a phone booth
and give old Jane Gallagher a buzz before I started bumming my way west, but I wasn't
in the mood. For one thing, I wasn't even sure she was home for vacation yet. So I just
went over to the museum, and hung around.
 While I was waiting around for Phoebe in the museum, right inside the doors and
all, these two little kids came up to me and asked me if I knew where the mummies were.
The one little kid, the one that asked me, had his pants open. I told him about it. So he
buttoned them up right where he was standing talking to me--he didn't even bother to go
behind a post or anything. He killed me. I would've laughed, but I was afraid I'd feel like
vomiting again, so I didn't. "Where're the mummies, fella?" the kid said again. "Ya
know?"
 I horsed around with the two of them a little bit. "The mummies? What're they?" I
asked the one kid.
 "You know. The mummies--them dead guys. That get buried in them toons and
all."
 Toons. That killed me. He meant tombs.
 "How come you two guys aren't in school?" I said.
 "No school t'day," the kid that did all the talking said. He was lying, sure as I'm
alive, the little bastard. I didn't have anything to do, though, till old Phoebe showed up, so
I helped them find the place where the mummies were. Boy, I used to know exactly
where they were, but I hadn't been in that museum in years.
 "You two guys so interested in mummies?" I said.
 "Yeah."
 "Can't your friend talk?" I said.
 "He ain't my friend. He's my brudda."
 "Can't he talk?" I looked at the one that wasn't doing any talking. "Can't you talk
at all?" I asked him.
 "Yeah," he said. "I don't feel like it."
 Finally we found the place where the mummies were, and we went in.
 "You know how the Egyptians buried their dead?" I asked the one kid.
 "Naa."
 "Well, you should. It's very interesting. They wrapped their faces up in these
cloths that were treated with some secret chemical. That way they could be buried in their
tombs for thousands of years and their faces wouldn't rot or anything. Nobody knows
how to do it except the Egyptians. Even modern science."
 To get to where the mummies were, you had to go down this very narrow sort of
hall with stones on the side that they'd taken right out of this Pharaoh's tomb and all. It
was pretty spooky, and you could tell the two hot-shots I was with weren't enjoying it too
much. They stuck close as hell to me, and the one that didn't talk at all practically was
holding onto my sleeve. "Let's go," he said to his brother. "I seen 'em awreddy. C'mon,
hey." He turned around and beat it.
 "He's got a yella streak a mile wide," the other one said. "So long!" He beat it too. 
 I was the only one left in the tomb then. I sort of liked it, in a way. It was so nice
and peaceful. Then, all of a sudden, you'd never guess what I saw on the wall. Another
"Fuck you." It was written with a red crayon or something, right under the glass part of
the wall, under the stones.
 That's the whole trouble. You can't ever find a place that's nice and peaceful,
because there isn't any. You may think there is, but once you get there, when you're not
looking, somebody'll sneak up and write "Fuck you" right under your nose. Try it
sometime. I think, even, if I ever die, and they stick me in a cemetery, and I have a
tombstone and all, it'll say "Holden Caulfield" on it, and then what year I was born and
what year I died, and then right under that it'll say "Fuck you." I'm positive, in fact.
 After I came out of the place where the mummies were, I had to go to the
bathroom. I sort of had diarrhea, if you want to know the truth. I didn't mind the diarrhea
part too much, but something else happened. When I was coming out of the can, right
before I got to the door, I sort of passed out. I was lucky, though. I mean I could've killed
myself when I hit the floor, but all I did was sort of land on my side. it was a funny thing,
though. I felt better after I passed out. I really did. My arm sort of hurt, from where I fell,
but I didn't feel so damn dizzy any more.
 It was about ten after twelve or so then, and so I went back and stood by the door
and waited for old Phoebe. I thought how it might be the last time I'd ever see her again.
Any of my relatives, I mean. I figured I'd probably see them again, but not for years. I
might come home when I was about thirty-five. I figured, in case somebody got sick and
wanted to see me before they died, but that would be the only reason I'd leave my cabin
and come back. I even started picturing how it would be when I came back. I knew my
mother'd get nervous as hell and start to cry and beg me to stay home and not go back to
my cabin, but I'd go anyway. I'd be casual as hell. I'd make her calm down, and then I'd
go over to the other side of the living room and take out this cigarette case and light a
cigarette, cool as all hell. I'd ask them all to visit me sometime if they wanted to, but I
wouldn't insist or anything. What I'd do, I'd let old Phoebe come out and visit me in the
summertime and on Christmas vacation and Easter vacation. And I'd let D.B. come out
and visit me for a while if he wanted a nice, quiet place for his writing, but he couldn't
write any movies in my cabin, only stories and books. I'd have this rule that nobody could
do anything phony when they visited me. If anybody tried to do anything phony, they
couldn't stay.
 All of a sudden I looked at the clock in the checkroom and it was twenty-five of
one. I began to get scared that maybe that old lady in the school had told that other lady
not to give old Phoebe my message. I began to get scared that maybe she'd told her to
burn it or something. It really scared hell out of me. I really wanted to see old Phoebe
before I hit the road. I mean I had her Christmas dough and all.
 Finally, I saw her. I saw her through the glass part of the door. The reason I saw
her, she had my crazy hunting hat on--you could see that hat about ten miles away.
 I went out the doors and started down these stone stairs to meet her. The thing I
couldn't understand, she had this big suitcase with her. She was just coming across Fifth
Avenue, and she was dragging this goddam big suitcase with her. She could hardly drag
it. When I got up closer, I saw it was my old suitcase, the one I used to use when I was at
Whooton. I couldn't figure out what the hell she was doing with it. "Hi," she said when
she got up close. She was all out of breath from that crazy suitcase. 
 "I thought maybe you weren't coming," I said. "What the hell's in that bag? I don't
need anything. I'm just going the way I am. I'm not even taking the bags I got at the
station. What the hellya got in there?"
 She put the suitcase down. "My clothes," she said. "I'm going with you. Can I?
Okay?"
 "What?" I said. I almost fell over when she said that. I swear to God I did. I got
sort of dizzy and I thought I was going to pass out or something again.
 "I took them down the back elevator so Charlene wouldn't see me. It isn't heavy.
All I have in it is two dresses and my moccasins and my underwear and socks and some
other things. Feel it. It isn't heavy. Feel it once. . . Can't I go with you? Holden? Can't I?
Please."
 "No. Shut up."
 I thought I was going to pass out cold. I mean I didn't mean to tell her to shut up
and all, but I thought I was going to pass out again.
 "Why can't I? Please, Holden! I won't do anything-- I'll just go with you, that's all!
I won't even take my clothes with me if you don't want me to--I'll just take my--"
 "You can't take anything. Because you're not going. I'm going alone. So shut up."
 "Please, Holden. Please let me go. I'll be very, very, very--You won't even--"
 "You're not going. Now, shut up! Gimme that bag," I said. I took the bag off her. I
was almost all set to hit her, I thought I was going to smack her for a second. I really did.
 She started to cry.
 "I thought you were supposed to be in a play at school and all I thought you were
supposed to be Benedict Arnold in that play and all," I said. I said it very nasty.
"Whuddaya want to do? Not be in the play, for God's sake?" That made her cry even
harder. I was glad. All of a sudden I wanted her to cry till her eyes practically dropped
out. I almost hated her. I think I hated her most because she wouldn't be in that play any
more if she went away with me.
 "Come on," I said. I started up the steps to the museum again. I figured what I'd
do was, I'd check the crazy suitcase she'd brought in the checkroom, andy then she could
get it again at three o'clock, after school. I knew she couldn't take it back to school with
her. "Come on, now," I said.
 She didn't go up the steps with me, though. She wouldn't come with me. I went up
anyway, though, and brought the bag in the checkroom and checked it, and then I came
down again. She was still standing there on the sidewalk, but she turned her back on me
when I came up to her. She can do that. She can turn her back on you when she feels like
it. "I'm not going away anywhere. I changed my mind. So stop crying, and shut up," I
said. The funny part was, she wasn't even crying when I said that. I said it anyway,
though, "C'mon, now. I'll walk you back to school. C'mon, now. You'll be late."
 She wouldn't answer me or anything. I sort of tried to get hold of her old hand, but
she wouldn't let me. She kept turning around on me.
 "Didja have your lunch? Ya had your lunch yet?" I asked her.
 She wouldn't answer me. All she did was, she took off my red hunting hat--the
one I gave her--and practically chucked it right in my face. Then she turned her back on
me again. It nearly killed me, but I didn't say anything. I just picked it up and stuck it in
my coat pocket.
 "Come on, hey. I'll walk you back to school," I said. 
 "I'm not going back to school."
 I didn't know what to say when she said that. I just stood there for a couple of
minutes.
 "You have to go back to school. You want to be in that play, don't you? You want
to be Benedict Arnold, don't you?"
 "No."
 "Sure you do. Certainly you do. C'mon, now, let's go," I said. "In the first place,
I'm not going away anywhere, I told you. I'm going home. I'm going home as soon as you
go back to school. First I'm gonna go down to the station and get my bags, and then I'm
gonna go straight--"
 "I said I'm not going back to school. You can do what you want to do, but I'm not
going back to chool," she said. "So shut up." It was the first time she ever told me to shut
up. It sounded terrible. God, it sounded terrible. It sounded worse than swearing. She still
wouldn't look at me either, and every time I sort of put my hand on her shoulder or
something, she wouldn't let me.
 "Listen, do you want to go for a walk?" I asked her. "Do you want to take a walk
down to the zoo? If I let you not go back to school this afternoon and go for walk, will
you cut out this crazy stuff?"
 She wouldn't answer me, so I said it over again. "If I let you skip school this
afternoon and go for a little walk, will you cut out the crazy stuff? Will you go back to
school tomorrow like a good girl?"
 "I may and I may not," she said. Then she ran right the hell across the street,
without even looking to see if any cars were coming. She's a madman sometimes.
 I didn't follow her, though. I knew she'd follow me, so I started walking
downtown toward the zoo, on the park side of the street, and she started walking
downtown on the other goddam side of the street, She wouldn't look over at me at all, but
I could tell she was probably watching me out of the corner of her crazy eye to see where
I was going and all. Anyway, we kept walking that way all the way to the zoo. The only
thing that bothered me was when a double-decker bus came along because then I couldn't
see across the street and I couldn't see where the hell she was. But when we got to the
zoo, I yelled over to her, "Phoebe! I'm going in the zoo! C'mon, now!" She wouldn't look
at me, but I could tell she heard me, and when I started down the steps to the zoo I turned
around and saw she was crossing the street and following me and all.
 There weren't too many people in the zoo because it was sort of a lousy day, but
there were a few around the sea lions' swimming pool and all. I started to go by but old
Phoebe stopped and made out she was watching the sea lions getting fed--a guy was
throwing fish at them--so I went back. I figured it was a good chance to catch up with her
and all. I went up and sort of stood behind her and sort of put my hands on her shoulders,
but she bent her knees and slid out from me--she can certainly be very snotty when she
wants to. She kept standing there while the sea lions were getting fed and I stood right
behind her. I didn't put my hands on her shoulders again or anything because if I had she
really would've beat it on me. Kids are funny. You have to watch what you're doing.
 She wouldn't walk right next to me when we left the sea lions, but she didn't walk
too far away. She sort of walked on one side of the sidewalk and I walked on the other
side. It wasn't too gorgeous, but it was better than having her walk about a mile away
from me, like before. We went up and watched the bears, on that little hill, for a while, 
but there wasn't much to watch. Only one of the bears was out, the polar bear. The other
one, the brown one, was in his goddam cave and wouldn't come out. All you could see
was his rear end. There was a little kid standing next to me, with a cowboy hat on
practically over his ears, and he kept telling his father, "Make him come out, Daddy.
Make him come out." I looked at old Phoebe, but she wouldn't laugh. You know kids
when they're sore at you. They won't laugh or anything.
 After we left the bears, we left the zoo and crossed over this little street in the
park, and then we went through one of those little tunnels that always smell from
somebody's taking a leak. It was on the way to the carrousel. Old Phoebe still wouldn't
talk to me or anything, but she was sort of walking next to me now. I took a hold of the
belt at the back of her coat, just for the hell of it, but she wouldn't let me. She said, "Keep
your hands to yourself, if you don't mind." She was still sore at me. But not as sore as she
was before. Anyway, we kept getting closer and closer to the carrousel and you could
start to hear that nutty music it always plays. It was playing "Oh, Marie!" It played that
same song about fifty years ago when I was a little kid. That's one nice thing about
carrousels, they always play the same songs.
 "I thought the carrousel was closed in the wintertime," old Phoebe said. It was the
first time she practically said anything. She probably forgot she was supposed to be sore
at me.
 "Maybe because it's around Christmas," I said.
 She didn't say anything when I said that. She probably remembered she was
supposed to be sore at me.
 "Do you want to go for a ride on it?" I said. I knew she probably did. When she
was a tiny little kid, and Allie and D.B. and I used to go to the park with her, she was
mad about the carrousel. You couldn't get her off the goddam thing.
 "I'm too big." she said. I thought she wasn't going to answer me, but she did.
 "No, you're not. Go on. I'll wait for ya. Go on," I said. We were right there then.
There were a few kids riding on it, mostly very little kids, and a few parents were waiting
around outside, sitting on the benches and all. What I did was, I went up to the window
where they sell the tickets and bought old Phoebe a ticket. Then I gave it to her. She was
standing right next to me. "Here," I said. "Wait a second--take the rest of your dough,
too." I started giving her the rest of the dough she'd lent me.
 "You keep it. Keep it for me," she said. Then she said right afterward--"Please."
 That's depressing, when somebody says "please" to you. I mean if it's Phoebe or
somebody. That depressed the hell out of me. But I put the dough back in my pocket.
 "Aren't you gonna ride, too?" she asked me. She was looking at me sort of funny.
You could tell she wasn't too sore at me any more.
 "Maybe I will the next time. I'll watch ya," I said. "Got your ticket?"
 "Yes."
 "Go ahead, then--I'll be on this bench right over here. I'll watch ya." I went over
and sat down on this bench, and she went and got on the carrousel. She walked all around
it. I mean she walked once all the way around it. Then she sat down on this big, brown,
beat-up-looking old horse. Then the carrousel started, and I watched her go around and
around. There were only about five or six other kids on the ride, and the song the
carrousel was playing was "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes." It was playing it very jazzy and
funny. All the kids kept trying to grab for the gold ring, and so was old Phoebe, and I was 
sort of afraid she'd fall off the goddam horse, but I didn't say anything or do anything.
The thing with kids is, if they want to grab the gold ring, you have to let them do it, and
not say anything. If they fall off they fall off, but it's bad if you say anything to them.
 When the ride was over she got off her horse and came over to me. "You ride
once, too, this time," she said.
 "No, I'll just watch ya. I think I'll just watch," I said. I gave her some more of her
dough. "Here. Get some more tickets."
 She took the dough off me. "I'm not mad at you any more," she said.
 "I know. Hurry up--the thing's gonna start again."
 Then all of a sudden she gave me a kiss. Then she held her hand out, and said,
"It's raining. It's starting to rain."
 "I know."
 Then what she did--it damn near killed me--she reached in my coat pocket and
took out my red hunting hat and put it on my head.
 "Don't you want it?" I said.
 "You can wear it a while."
 "Okay. Hurry up, though, now. You're gonna miss your ride. You won't get your
own horse or anything."
 She kept hanging around, though.
 "Did you mean it what you said? You really aren't going away anywhere? Are
you really going home afterwards?" she asked me.
 "Yeah," I said. I meant it, too. I wasn't lying to her. I really did go home
afterwards. "Hurry up, now," I said. "The thing's starting."
 She ran and bought her ticket and got back on the goddam carrousel just in time.
Then she walked all the way around it till she got her own horse back. Then she got on it.
She waved to me and I waved back.
 Boy, it began to rain like a bastard. In buckets, I swear to God. All the parents and
mothers and everybody went over and stood right under the roof of the carrousel, so they
wouldn't get soaked to the skin or anything, but I stuck around on the bench for quite a
while. I got pretty soaking wet, especially my neck and my pants. My hunting hat really
gave me quite a lot of protection, in a way; but I got soaked anyway. I didn't care, though.
I felt so damn happy all of sudden, the way old Phoebe kept going around and around. I
was damn near bawling, I felt so damn happy, if you want to know the truth. I don't know
why. It was just that she looked so damn nice, the way she kept going around and around,
in her blue coat and all. God, I wish you could've been there.
26
 That's all I'm going to tell about. I could probably tell you what I did after I went
home, and how I got sick and all, and what school I'm supposed to go to next fall, after I
get out of here, but I don't feel like it. I really don't. That stuff doesn't interest me too
much right now.
 A lot of people, especially this one psychoanalyst guy they have here, keeps
asking me if I'm going apply myself when I go back to school next September. It's such a
stupid question, in my opinion. I mean how do you know what you're going to do till you 
do it? The answer is, you don't. I think I am, but how do I know? I swear it's a stupid
question.
 D.B. isn't as bad as the rest of them, but he keeps asking me a lot of questions,
too. He drove over last Saturday with this English babe that's in this new picture he's
writing. She was pretty affected, but very good-looking. Anyway, one time when she
went to the ladies' room way the hell down in the other wing D.B. asked me what I
thought about all this stuff I just finished telling you about. I didn't know what the hell to
say. If you want to know the truth, I don't know what I think about it. I'm sorry I told so
many people about it. About all I know is, I sort of miss everybody I told about. Even old
Stradlater and Ackley, for instance. I think I even miss that goddam Maurice. It's funny.
Don't ever tell anybody anything. If you do, you start missing everybody. lly aren't going away anywhere? Are
you really going home afterwards?" she asked me.
 "Yeah," I said. I meant it, too. I wasn't lying to her. I really did go home
afterwards. "Hurry up, now," I said. "The thing's starting."
 She ran and bought her ticket and got back on the goddam carrousel just in time.
Then she walked all the way around it till she got her own horse back. Then she got on it.
She waved to me and I waved back.
 Boy, it began to rain like a bastard. In buckets, I swear to God. All the parents and
mothers and everybody went over and stood right under the roof of the carrousel, so they
wouldn't get soaked to the skin or anything, but I stuck around on the bench for quite a
while. I got pretty soaking wet, especially my neck and my pants. My hunting hat really
gave me quite a lot of protection, in a way; but I got soaked anyway. I didn't care, though.
I felt so damn happy all of sudden, the way old Phoebe kept going around and around. I
was damn near bawling, I felt so damn happy, if you want to know the truth. I don't know
why. It was just that she looked so damn nice, the way she kept going around and around,
in her blue coat and all. God, I wish you could've been there.
26
 That's all I'm going to tell about. I could probably tell you what I did after I went
home, and how I got sick and all, and what school I'm supposed to go to next fall, after I
get out of here, but I don't feel like it. I really don't. That stuff doesn't interest me too
much right now.
 A lot of people, especially this one psychoanalyst guy they have here, keeps
asking me if I'm going apply myself when I go back to school next September. It's such a
stupid question, in my opinion. I mean how do you know what you're going to do till you 
do it? The answer is, you don't. I think I am, but how do I know? I swear it's a stupid
question.
 D.B. isn't as bad as the rest of them, but he keeps asking me a lot of questions,
too. He drove over last Saturday with this English babe that's in this new picture he's
writing. She was pretty affected, but very good-looking. Anyway, one time when she
went to the ladies' room way the hell down in the other wing D.B. asked me what I
thought about all this stuff I just finished telling you about. I didn't know what the hell to
say. If you want to know the truth, I don't know what I think about it. I'm sorry I told so
many people about it. About all I know is, I sort of miss everybody I told about. Even old
Stradlater and Ackley, for instance. I think I even miss that goddam Maurice. It's funny.
Don't ever tell anybody anything. If you do, you start missing everybody. 
old you. They let us out early. They let the whole--" 
 "You did get kicked out! You did!" old Phoebe said. Then she hit me on the leg
with her fist. She gets very fisty when she feels like it. "You did! Oh, Holden!" She had
her hand on her mouth and all. She gets very emotional, I swear to God.
 "Who said I got kicked out? Nobody said I--"
 "You did. You did," she said. Then she smacked me again with her fist. If you
don't think that hurts, you're crazy. "Daddy'll kill you!" she said. Then she flopped on her
stomach on the bed and put the goddam pillow over her head. She does that quite
frequently. She's a true madman sometimes.
 "Cut it out, now," I said. "Nobody's gonna kill me. Nobody's gonna even--C'mon,
Phoeb, take that goddam thing off your head. Nobody's gonna kill me."
 She wouldn't take it off, though. You can't make her do something if she doesn't
want to. All she kept saying was, "Daddy s gonna kill you." You could hardly understand
her with that goddam pillow over her head.
 "Nobody's gonna kill me. Use your head. In the first place, I'm going away. What
I may do, I may get a job on a ranch or something for a while. I know this guy whose
grandfather's got a ranch in Colorado. I may get a job out there," I said. "I'll keep in touch
with you and all when I'm gone, if I go. C'mon. Take that off your head. C'mon, hey,
Phoeb. Please. Please, willya?'
 She wouldn t take it off, though I tried pulling it off, but she's strong as hell. You
get tired fighting with her. Boy, if she wants to keep a pillow over her head, she keeps it.
"Phoebe, please. C'mon outa there," I kept saying. "C'mon, hey . . . Hey, Weatherfield.
C'mon out."
 She wouldn't come out, though. You can't even reason with her sometimes.
Finally, I got up and went out in the living room and got some cigarettes out of the box
on the table and stuck some in my pocket. I was all out.
22
 When I came back, she had the pillow off her head all right--I knew she would--
but she still wouldn't look at me, even though she was laying on her back and all. When I
came around the side of the bed and sat down again, she turned her crazy face the other
way. She was ostracizing the hell out of me. Just like the fencing team at Pencey when I
left all the goddam foils on the subway.
 "How's old Hazel Weatherfield?" I said. "You write any new stories about her? I
got that one you sent me right in my suitcase. It's down at the station. It's very good."
 "Daddy'll kill you."
 Boy, she really gets something on her mind when she gets something on her mind.
 "No, he won't. The worst he'll do, he'll give me hell again, and then he'll send me
to that goddam military school. That's all he'll do to me. And in the first place, I won't
even be around. I'll be away. I'll be--I'll probably be in Colorado on this ranch."
 "Don't make me laugh. You can't even ride a horse."
 "Who can't? Sure I can. Certainly I can. They can teach you in about two
minutes," I said. "Stop picking at that." She was picking at that adhesive tape on her arm.
"Who gave you that haircut?" I asked her. I just noticed what a stupid haircut somebody
gave her. It was way too short. 
 "None of your business," she said. She can be very snotty sometimes. She can be
quite snotty. "I suppose you failed in every single subject again," she said--very snotty. It
was sort of funny, too, in a way. She sounds like a goddam schoolteacher sometimes, and
she's only a little child.
 "No, I didn't," I said. "I passed English." Then, just for the hell of it, I gave her a
pinch on the behind. It was sticking way out in the breeze, the way she was laying on her
side. She has hardly any behind. I didn't do it hard, but she tried to hit my hand anyway,
but she missed.
 Then all of a sudden, she said, "Oh, why did you do it?" She meant why did I get
the ax again. It made me sort of sad, the way she said it.
 "Oh, God, Phoebe, don't ask me. I'm sick of everybody asking me that," I said. "A
million reasons why. It was one of the worst schools I ever went to. It was full of
phonies. And mean guys. You never saw so many mean guys in your life. For instance, if
you were having a bull session in somebody's room, and somebody wanted to come in,
nobody'd let them in if they were some dopey, pimply guy. Everybody was always
locking their door when somebody wanted to come in. And they had this goddam secret
fraternity that I was too yellow not to join. There was this one pimply, boring guy, Robert
Ackley, that wanted to get in. He kept trying to join, and they wouldn't let him. Just
because he was boring and pimply. I don't even feel like talking about it. It was a stinking
school. Take my word."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything, but she was listen ing. I could tell by the back of
her neck that she was listening. She always listens when you tell her something. And the
funny part is she knows, half the time, what the hell you're talking about. She really does.
 I kept talking about old Pencey. I sort of felt like it.
 "Even the couple of nice teachers on the faculty, they were phonies, too," I said.
"There was this one old guy, Mr. Spencer. His wife was always giving you hot chocolate
and all that stuff, and they were really pretty nice. But you should've seen him when the
headmaster, old Thurmer, came in the history class and sat down in the back of the room.
He was always coming in and sitting down in the back of the room for about a half an
hour. He was supposed to be incognito or something. After a while, he'd be sitting back
there and then he'd start interrupting what old Spencer was saying to crack a lot of corny
jokes. Old Spencer'd practically kill himself chuckling and smiling and all, like as if
Thurmer was a goddam prince or something."
 "Don't swear so much."
 "It would've made you puke, I swear it would," I said. "Then, on Veterans' Day.
They have this day, Veterans' Day, that all the jerks that graduated from Pencey around
1776 come back and walk all over the place, with their wives and children and
everybody. You should've seen this one old guy that was about fifty. What he did was, he
came in our room and knocked on the door and asked us if we'd mind if he used the
bathroom. The bathroom was at the end of the corridor--I don't know why the hell he
asked us. You know what he said? He said he wanted to see if his initials were still in one
of the can doors. What he did, he carved his goddam stupid sad old initials in one of the
can doors about ninety years ago, and he wanted to see if they were still there. So my
roommate and I walked him down to the bathroom and all, and we had to stand there
while he looked for his initials in all the can doors. He kept talking to us the whole time,
telling us how when he was at Pencey they were the happiest days of his life, and giving 
us a lot of advice for the future and all. Boy, did he depress me! I don't mean he was a
bad guy--he wasn't. But you don't have to be a bad guy to depress somebody--you can be
a good guy and do it. All you have to do to depress somebody is give them a lot of phony
advice while you're looking for your initials in some can door--that's all you have to do. I
don't know. Maybe it wouldn't have been so bad if he hadn't been all out of breath. He
was all out of breath from just climbing up the stairs, and the whole time he was looking
for his initials he kept breathing hard, with his nostrils all funny and sad, while he kept
telling Stradlater and I to get all we could out of Pencey. God, Phoebe! I can't explain. I
just didn't like anything that was happening at Pencey. I can't explain."
 Old Phoebe said something then, but I couldn't hear her. She had the side of her
mouth right smack on the pillow, and I couldn't hear her.
 "What?" I said. "Take your mouth away. I can't hear you with your mouth that
way."
 "You don't like anything that's happening."
 It made me even more depressed when she said that.
 "Yes I do. Yes I do. Sure I do. Don't say that. Why the hell do you say that?"
 "Because you don't. You don't like any schools. You don't like a million things.
You don't."
 "I do! That's where you're wrong--that's exactly where you're wrong! Why the
hell do you have to say that?" I said. Boy, was she depressing me.
 "Because you don't," she said. "Name one thing."
 "One thing? One thing I like?" I said. "Okay."
 The trouble was, I couldn't concentrate too hot. Sometimes it's hard to
concentrate.
 "One thing I like a lot you mean?" I asked her.
 She didn't answer me, though. She was in a cockeyed position way the hell over
the other side of the bed. She was about a thousand miles away. "C'mon answer me," I
said. "One thing I like a lot, or one thing I just like?"
 "You like a lot."
 "All right," I said. But the trouble was, I couldn't concentrate. About all I could
think of were those two nuns that went around collecting dough in those beatup old straw
baskets. Especially the one with the glasses with those iron rims. And this boy I knew at
Elkton Hills. There was this one boy at Elkton Hills, named James Castle, that wouldn't
take back something he said about this very conceited boy, Phil Stabile. James Castle
called him a very conceited guy, and one of Stabile's lousy friends went and squealed on
him to Stabile. So Stabile, with about six other dirty bastards, went down to James
Castle's room and went in and locked the goddam door and tried to make him take back
what he said, but he wouldn't do it. So they started in on him. I won't even tell you what
they did to him--it's too repulsive--but he still wouldn't take it back, old James Castle.
And you should've seen him. He was a skinny little weak-looking guy, with wrists about
as big as pencils. Finally, what he did, instead of taking back what he said, he jumped out
the window. I was in the shower and all, and even I could hear him land outside. But I
just thought something fell out the window, a radio or a desk or something, not a boy or
anything. Then I heard everybody running through the corridor and down the stairs, so I
put on my bathrobe and I ran downstairs too, and there was old James Castle laying right
on the stone steps and all. He was dead, and his teeth, and blood, were all over the place, 
and nobody would even go near him. He had on this turtleneck sweater I'd lent him. All
they did with the guys that were in the room with him was expel them. They didn't even
go to jail.
 That was about all I could think of, though. Those two nuns I saw at breakfast and
this boy James Castle I knew at Elkton Hills. The funny part is, I hardly even know
James Castle, if you want to know the truth. He was one of these very quiet guys. He was
in my math class, but he was way over on the other side of the room, and he hardly ever
got up to recite or go to the blackboard or anything. Some guys in school hardly ever get
up to recite or go to the blackboard. I think the only time I ever even had a conversation
with him was that time he asked me if he could borrow this turtleneck sweater I had. I
damn near dropped dead when he asked me, I was so surprised and all. I remember I was
brushing my teeth, in the can, when he asked me. He said his cousin was coming in to
take him for a drive and all. I didn't even know he knew I had a turtleneck sweater. All I
knew about him was that his name was always right ahead of me at roll call. Cabel, R.,
Cabel, W., Castle, Caulfield--I can still remember it. If you want to know the truth, I
almost didn't lend him my sweater. Just because I didn't know him too well.
 "What?" I said to old Phoebe. She said something to me, but I didn't hear her.
 "You can't even think of one thing."
 "Yes, I can. Yes, I can."
 "Well, do it, then."
 "I like Allie," I said. "And I like doing what I'm doing right now. Sitting here with
you, and talking, and thinking about stuff, and--"
 "Allie's dead--You always say that! If somebody's dead and everything, and in
Heaven, then it isn't really--"
 "I know he's dead! Don't you think I know that? I can still like him, though, can't
I? Just because somebody's dead, you don't just stop liking them, for God's sake--
especially if they were about a thousand times nicer than the people you know that're
alive and all."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything. When she can't think of anything to say, she
doesn't say a goddam word.
 "Anyway, I like it now," I said. "I mean right now. Sitting here with you and just
chewing the fat and horsing--"
 "That isn't anything really!"
 "It is so something really! Certainly it is! Why the hell isn't it? People never think
anything is anything really. I'm getting goddam sick of it,"
 "Stop swearing. All right, name something else. Name something you'd like to be.
Like a scientist. Or a lawyer or something."
 "I couldn't be a scientist. I'm no good in science."
 "Well, a lawyer--like Daddy and all."
 "Lawyers are all right, I guess--but it doesn't appeal to me," I said. "I mean they're
all right if they go around saving innocent guys' lives all the time, and like that, but you
don't do that kind of stuff if you're a lawyer. All you do is make a lot of dough and play
golf and play bridge and buy cars and drink Martinis and look like a hot-shot. And
besides. Even if you did go around saving guys' lives and all, how would you know if you
did it because you really wanted to save guys' lives, or because you did it because what
you really wanted to do was be a terrific lawyer, with everybody slapping you on the 
back and congratulating you in court when the goddam trial was over, the reporters and
everybody, the way it is in the dirty movies? How would you know you weren't being a
phony? The trouble is, you wouldn't."
 I'm not too sure old Phoebe knew what the hell I was talking about. I mean she's
only a little child and all. But she was listening, at least. If somebody at least listens, it's
not too bad.
 "Daddy's going to kill you. He's going to kill you," she said.
 I wasn't listening, though. I was thinking about something else--something crazy.
"You know what I'd like to be?" I said. "You know what I'd like to be? I mean if I had my
goddam choice?"
 "What? Stop swearing."
 "You know that song 'If a body catch a body comin' through the rye'? I'd like--"
 "It's 'If a body meet a body coming through the rye'!" old Phoebe said. "It's a
poem. By Robert Burns."
 "I know it's a poem by Robert Burns."
 She was right, though. It is "If a body meet a body coming through the rye." I
didn't know it then, though.
 "I thought it was 'If a body catch a body,'" I said. "Anyway, I keep picturing all
these little kids playing some game in this big field of rye and all. Thousands of little
kids, and nobody's around--nobody big, I mean--except me. And I'm standing on the edge
of some crazy cliff. What I have to do, I have to catch everybody if they start to go over
the cliff--I mean if they're running and they don't look where they're going I have to come
out from somewhere and catch them. That's all I'd do all day. I'd just be the catcher in the
rye and all. I know it's crazy, but that's the only thing I'd really like to be. I know it's
crazy."
 Old Phoebe didn't say anything for a long time. Then, when she said something,
all she said was, "Daddy's going to kill you."
 "I don't give a damn if he does," I said. I got up from the bed then, because what I
wanted to do, I wanted to phone up this guy that was my English teacher at Elkton Hills,
Mr. Antolini. He lived in New York now. He quit Elkton Hills. He took this job teaching
English at N.Y.U. "I have to make a phone call," I told Phoebe. "I'll be right back. Don't
go to sleep." I didn't want her to go to sleep while I was in the living room. I knew she
wouldn't but I said it anyway, just to make sure.
 While I was walking toward the door, old Phoebe said, "Holden!" and I turned
around.
 She was sitting way up in bed. She looked so pretty. "I'm taking belching lessons
from this girl, Phyllis Margulies," she said. "Listen."
 I listened, and I heard something, but it wasn't much. "Good," I said. Then I went
out in the living room and called up this teacher I had, Mr. Antolini.
23
 I made it very snappy on the phone because I was afraid my parents would barge
in on me right in the middle of it. They didn't, though. Mr. Antolini was very nice. He
said I could come right over if I wanted to. I think I probably woke he and his wife up, 
because it took them a helluva long time to answer the phone. The first thing he asked me
was if anything was wrong, and I said no. I said I'd flunked out of Pencey, though. I
thought I might as well tell him. He said "Good God," when I said that. He had a good
sense of humor and all. He told me to come right over if I felt like it.
 He was about the best teacher I ever had, Mr. Antolini. He was a pretty young
guy, not much older than my brother D.B., and you could kid around with him without
losing your respect for him. He was the one that finally picked up that boy that jumped
out the window I told you about, James Castle. Old Mr. Antolini felt his pulse and all,
and then he took off his coat and put it over James Castle and carried him all the way
over to the infirmary. He didn't even give a damn if his coat got all bloody.
 When I got back to D.B.'s room, old Phoebe'd turned the radio on. This dance
music was coming out. She'd turned it on low, though, so the maid wouldn't hear it. You
should've seen her. She was sitting smack in the middle of the bed, outside the covers,
with her legs folded like one of those Yogi guys. She was listening to the music. She kills
me.
 "C'mon," I said. "You feel like dancing?" I taught her how to dance and all when
she was a tiny little kid. She's a very good dancer. I mean I just taught her a few things.
She learned it mostly by herself. You can't teach somebody how to really dance.
 "You have shoes on," she said.
 "I'll take 'em off. C'mon."
 She practically jumped off the bed, and then she waited while I took my shoes off,
and then I danced with her for a while. She's really damn good. I don't like people that
dance with little kids, because most of the time it looks terrible. I mean if you're out at a
restaurant somewhere and you see some old guy take his little kid out on the dance floor.
Usually they keep yanking the kid's dress up in the back by mistake, and the kid can't
dance worth a damn anyway, and it looks terrible, but I don't do it out in public with
Phoebe or anything. We just horse around in the house. It's different with her anyway,
because she can dance. She can follow anything you do. I mean if you hold her in close
as hell so that it doesn't matter that your legs are so much longer. She stays right with
you. You can cross over, or do some corny dips, or even jitterbug a little, and she stays
right with you. You can even tango, for God's sake.
 We danced about four numbers. In between numbers she's funny as hell. She stays
right in position. She won't even talk or anything. You both have to stay right in position
and wait for the orchestra to start playing again. That kills me. You're not supposed to
laugh or anything, either.
 Anyway, we danced about four numbers, and then I turned off the radio. Old
Phoebe jumped back in bed and got under the covers. "I'm improving, aren't I?" she
asked me.
 "And how," I said. I sat down next to her on the bed again. I was sort of out of
breath. I was smoking so damn much, I had hardly any wind. She wasn't even out of
breath.
 "Feel my forehead," she said all of a sudden.
 "Why?"
 "Feel it. Just feel it once."
 I felt it. I didn't feel anything, though.
 "Does it feel very feverish?" she said. 
 "No. Is it supposed to?"
 "Yes--I'm making it. Feel it again."
 I felt it again, and I still didn't feel anything, but I said, "I think it's starting to,
now." I didn't want her to get a goddam inferiority complex.
 She nodded. "I can make it go up to over the thermoneter."
 "Thermometer. Who said so?"
 "Alice Holmborg showed me how. You cross your legs and hold your breath and
think of something very, very hot. A radiator or something. Then your whole forehead
gets so hot you can burn somebody's hand."
 That killed me. I pulled my hand away from her forehead, like I was in terrific
danger. "Thanks for telling me," I said.
 "Oh, I wouldn't've burned your hand. I'd've stopped before it got too--Shhh!"
Then, quick as hell, she sat way the hell up in bed.
 She scared hell out of me when she did that. "What's the matter?" I said.
 "The front door!" she said in this loud whisper. "It's them!"
 I quick jumped up and ran over and turned off the light over the desk. Then I
jammed out my cigarette on my shoe and put it in my pocket. Then I fanned hell out of
the air, to get the smoke out--I shouldn't even have been smoking, for God's sake. Then I
grabbed my shoes and got in the closet and shut the door. Boy, my heart was beating like
a bastard.
 I heard my mother come in the room.
 "Phoebe?" she said. "Now, stop that. I saw the light, young lady."
 "Hello!" I heard old Phoebe say. "I couldn't sleep. Did you have a good time?"
 "Marvelous," my mother said, but you could tell she didn't mean it. She doesn't
enjoy herself much when she goes out. "Why are you awake, may I ask? Were you warm
enough?"
 "I was warm enough, I just couldn't sleep."
 "Phoebe, have you been smoking a cigarette in here? Tell me the truth, please,
young lady."
 "What?" old Phoebe said.
 "You heard me."
 "I just lit one for one second. I just took one puff. Then I threw it out the
window."
 "Why, may I ask?"
 "I couldn't sleep."
 "I don't like that, Phoebe. I don't like that at all," my mother said. "Do you want
another blanket?"
 "No, thanks. G'night!" old Phoebe said. She was trying to get rid of her, you could
tell.
 "How was the movie?" my mother said.
 "Excellent. Except Alice's mother. She kept leaning over and asking her if she felt
grippy during the whole entire movie. We took a taxi home."
 "Let me feel your forehead."
 "I didn't catch anything. She didn't have anything. It was just her mother."
 "Well. Go to sleep now. How was your dinner?"
 "Lousy," Phoebe said. 
 "You heard what your father said about using that word. What was lousy about it?
You had a lovely lamb chop. I walked all over Lexington Avenue just to--"
 "The lamb chop was all right, but Charlene always breathes on me whenever she
puts something down. She breathes all over the food and everything. She breathes on
everything."
 "Well. Go to sleep. Give Mother a kiss. Did you say your prayers?"
 "I said them in the bathroom. G'night!"
 "Good night. Go right to sleep now. I have a splitting headache," my mother said.
She gets headaches quite frequently. She really does.
 "Take a few aspirins," old Phoebe said. "Holden'll be home on Wednesday, won't
he?"
 "So far as I know. Get under there, now. Way down."
 I heard my mother go out and close the door. I waited a couple of minutes. Then I
came out of the closet. I bumped smack into old Phoebe when I did it, because it was so
dark and she was out of bed and coming to tell me. "I hurt you?" I said. You had to
whisper now, because they were both home. "I gotta get a move on," I said. I found the
edge of the bed in the dark and sat down on it and started putting on my shoes. I was
pretty nervous. I admit it.
 "Don't go now," Phoebe whispered. "Wait'll they're asleep!"
 "No. Now. Now's the best time," I said. "She'll be in the bathroom and Daddy'll
turn on the news or something. Now's the best time." I could hardly tie my shoelaces, I
was so damn nervous. Not that they would've killed me or anything if they'd caught me
home, but it would've been very unpleasant and all. "Where the hell are ya?" I said to old
Phoebe. It was so dark I couldn't see her.
 "Here." She was standing right next to me. I didn't even see her.
 "I got my damn bags at the station," I said. "Listen. You got any dough, Phoeb?
I'm practically broke."
 "Just my Christmas dough. For presents and all. I haven't done any shopping at all
yet."
 "Oh." I didn't want to take her Christmas dough.
 "You want some?" she said.
 "I don't want to take your Christmas dough."
 "I can lend you some," she said. Then I heard her over at D.B.'s desk, opening a
million drawers and feeling around with her hand. It was pitch-black, it was so dark in the
room. "If you go away, you won't see me in the play," she said. Her voice sounded funny
when she said it.
 "Yes, I will. I won't go way before that. You think I wanna miss the play?" I said.
"What I'll do, I'll probably stay at Mr. Antolini's house till maybe Tuesday night. Then I'll
come home. If I get a chance, I'll phone ya."
 "Here," old Phoebe said. She was trying to give me the dough, but she couldn't
find my hand.
 "Where?"
 She put the dough in my hand.
 "Hey, I don't need all this," I said. "Just give me two bucks, is all. No kidding--
Here." I tried to give it back to her, but she wouldn't take it.
 "You can take it all. You can pay me back. Bring it to the play." 
 "How much is it, for God's sake?"
 "Eight dollars and eighty-five cents. Sixty-five cents. I spent some."
 Then, all of a sudden, I started to cry. I couldn't help it. I did it so nobody could
hear me, but I did it. It scared hell out of old Phoebe when I started doing it, and she
came over and tried to make me stop, but once you get started, you can't just stop on a
goddam dime. I was still sitting on the edge of the bed when I did it, and she put her old
arm around my neck, and I put my arm around her, too, but I still couldn't stop for a long
time. I thought I was going to choke to death or something. Boy, I scared hell out of poor
old Phoebe. The damn window was open and everything, and I could feel her shivering
and all, because all she had on was her pajamas. I tried to make her get back in bed, but
she wouldn't go. Finally I stopped. But it certainly took me a long, long time. Then I
finished buttoning my coat and all. I told her I'd keep in touch with her. She told me I
could sleep with her if I wanted to, but I said no, that I'd better beat it, that Mr. Antolini
was waiting for me and all. Then I took my hunting hat out of my coat pocket and gave it
to her. She likes those kind of crazy hats. She didn't want to take it, but I made her. I'll bet
she slept with it on. She really likes those kind of hats. Then I told her again I'd give her a
buzz if I got a chance, and then I left.
 It was a helluva lot easier getting out of the house than it was getting in, for some
reason. For one thing, I didn't give much of a damn any more if they caught me. I really
didn't. I figured if they caught me, they caught me. I almost wished they did, in a way.
 I walked all the way downstairs, instead of taking the elevator. I went down the
back stairs. I nearly broke my neck on about ten million garbage pails, but I got out all
right. The elevator boy didn't even see me. He probably still thinks I'm up at the
Dicksteins'.
24
 Mr. and Mrs. Antolini had this very swanky apartment over on Sutton Place, with
two steps that you go down to get in the living room, and a bar and all. I'd been there
quite a few times, because after I left Elkton Hills Mr. Antoilni came up to our house for
dinner quite frequently to find out how I was getting along. He wasn't married then. Then
when he got married, I used to play tennis with he and Mrs. Antolini quite frequently, out
at the West Side Tennis Club, in Forest Hills, Long Island. Mrs. Antolini, belonged there.
She was lousy with dough. She was about sixty years older than Mr. Antolini, but they
seemed to get along quite well. For one thing, they were both very intellectual, especially
Mr. Antolini except that he was more witty than intellectual when you were with him,
sort of like D.B. Mrs. Antolini was mostly serious. She had asthma pretty bad. They both
read all D.B.'s stories--Mrs. Antolini, too--and when D.B. went to Hollywood, Mr.
Antolini phoned him up and told him not to go. He went anyway, though. Mr. Antolini
said that anybody that could write like D.B. had no business going out to Hollywood.
That's exactly what I said, practically.
 I would have walked down to their house, because I didn't want to spend any of
Phoebe's Christmas dough that I didn't have to, but I felt funny when I got outside. Sort of
dizzy. So I took a cab. I didn't want to, but I did. I had a helluva time even finding a cab. 
 Old Mr. Antolini answered the door when I rang the bell--after the elevator boy
finally let me up, the bastard. He had on his bathrobe and slippers, and he had a highball
in one hand. He was a pretty sophisticated guy, and he was a pretty heavy drinker.
"Holden, m'boy!" he said. "My God, he's grown another twenty inches. Fine to see you."
 "How are you, Mr. Antolini? How's Mrs. Antolini?"
 "We're both just dandy. Let's have that coat." He took my coat off me and hung it
up. "I expected to see a day-old infant in your arms. Nowhere to turn. Snowflakes in your
eyelashes." He's a very witty guy sometimes. He turned around and yelled out to the
kitchen, "Lillian! How's the coffee coming?" Lillian was Mrs. Antolini's first name.
 "It's all ready," she yelled back. "Is that Holden? Hello, Holden!"
 "Hello, Mrs. Antolini!"
 You were always yelling when you were there. That's because the both of them
were never in the same room at the same time. It was sort of funny.
 "Sit down, Holden," Mr. Antolini said. You could tell he was a little oiled up. The
room looked like they'd just had a party. Glasses were all over the place, and dishes with
peanuts in them. "Excuse the appearance of the place," he said. "We've been entertaining
some Buffalo friends of Mrs. Antolini's . . . Some buffaloes, as a matter of fact."
 I laughed, and Mrs. Antolini yelled something in to me from the kitchen, but I
couldn't hear her. "What'd she say?" I asked Mr. Antolini.
 "She said not to look at her when she comes in. She just arose from the sack.
Have a cigarette. Are you smoking now?"
 "Thanks," I said. I took a cigarette from the box he offered me. "Just once in a
while. I'm a moderate smoker."
 "I'll bet you are," he said. He gave me a light from this big lighter off the table.
"So. You and Pencey are no longer one," he said. He always said things that way.
Sometimes it amused me a lot and sometimes it didn't. He sort of did it a little bit too
much. I don't mean he wasn't witty or anything--he was--but sometimes it gets on your
nerves when somebody's always saying things like "So you and Pencey are no longer
one." D.B. does it too much sometimes, too.
 "What was the trouble?" Mr. Antolini asked me. "How'd you do in English? I'll
show you the door in short order if you flunked English, you little ace composition
writer."
 "Oh, I passed English all right. It was mostly literature, though. I only wrote about
two compositions the whole term," I said. "I flunked Oral Expression, though. They had
this course you had to take, Oral Expression. That I flunked."
 "Why?"
 "Oh, I don't know." I didn't feel much like going into It. I was still feeling sort of
dizzy or something, and I had a helluva headache all of a sudden. I really did. But you
could tell he was interested, so I told him a little bit about it. "It's this course where each
boy in class has to get up in class and make a speech. You know. Spontaneous and all.
And if the boy digresses at all, you're supposed to yell 'Digression!' at him as fast as you
can. It just about drove me crazy. I got an F in it."
 "Why?"
 "Oh, I don't know. That digression business got on my nerves. I don't know. The
trouble with me is, I like it when somebody digresses. It's more interesting and all." 
 "You don't care to have somebody stick to the point when he tells you
something?"
 "Oh, sure! I like somebody to stick to the point and all. But I don't like them to
stick too much to the point. I don't know. I guess I don't like it when somebody sticks to
the point all the time. The boys that got the best marks in Oral Expression were the ones
that stuck to the point all the time--I admit it. But there was this one boy, Richard
Kinsella. He didn't stick to the point too much, and they were always yelling 'Digression!'
at him. It was terrible, because in the first place, he was a very nervous guy--I mean he
was a very nervous guy--and his lips were always shaking whenever it was his time to
make a speech, and you could hardly hear him if you were sitting way in the back of the
room. When his lips sort of quit shaking a little bit, though, I liked his speeches better
than anybody else's. He practically flunked the course, though, too. He got a D plus
because they kept yelling 'Digression!' at him all the time. For instance, he made this
speech about this farm his father bought in Vermont. They kept yelling 'Digression!' at
him the whole time he was making it, and this teacher, Mr. Vinson, gave him an F on it
because he hadn't told what kind of animals and vegetables and stuff grew on the farm
and all. What he did was, Richard Kinsella, he'd start telling you all about that stuff--then
all of a sudden he'd start telling you about this letter his mother got from his uncle, and
how his uncle got polio and all when he was forty-two years old, and how he wouldn't let
anybody come to see him in the hospital because he didn't want anybody to see him with
a brace on. It didn't have much to do with the farm--I admit it--but it was nice. It's nice
when somebody tells you about their uncle. Especially when they start out telling you
about their father's farm and then all of a sudden get more interested in their uncle. I
mean it's dirty to keep yelling 'Digression!' at him when he's all nice and excited. I don't
know. It's hard to explain." I didn't feel too much like trying, either. For one thing, I had
this terrific headache all of a sudden. I wished to God old Mrs. Antolini would come in
with the coffee. That's something that annoys hell out of me--I mean if somebody says
the coffee's all ready and it isn't.
 "Holden. . . One short, faintly stuffy, pedagogical question. Don't you think there's
a time and place for everything? Don't you think if someone starts out to tell you about
his father's farm, he should stick to his guns, then get around to telling you about his
uncle's brace? Or, if his uncle's brace is such a provocative subject, shouldn't he have
selected it in the first place as his subject--not the farm?"
 I didn't feel much like thinking and answering and all. I had a headache and I felt
lousy. I even had sort of a stomach-ache, if you want to know the truth.
 "Yes--I don't know. I guess he should. I mean I guess he should've picked his
uncle as a subject, instead of the farm, if that interested him most. But what I mean is,
lots of time you don't know what interests you most till you start talking about something
that doesn't interest you most. I mean you can't help it sometimes. What I think is, you're
supposed to leave somebody alone if he's at least being interesting and he's getting all
excited about something. I like it when somebody gets excited about something. It's nice.
You just didn't know this teacher, Mr. Vinson. He could drive you crazy sometimes, him
and the goddam class. I mean he'd keep telling you to unify and simplify all the time.
Some things you just can't do that to. I mean you can't hardly ever simplify and unify
something just because somebody wants you to. You didn't know this guy, Mr. Vinson. I
mean he was very intelligent and all, but you could tell he didn't have too much brains." 
 "Coffee, gentlemen, finally," Mrs. Antolini said. She came in carrying this tray
with coffee and cakes and stuff on it. "Holden, don't you even peek at me. I'm a mess."
 "Hello, Mrs. Antolini," I said. I started to get up and all, but Mr. Antolini got hold
of my jacket and pulled me back down. Old Mrs. Antolini's hair was full of those iron
curler jobs, and she didn't have any lipstick or anything on. She didn't look too gorgeous.
She looked pretty old and all.
 "I'll leave this right here. Just dive in, you two," she said. She put the tray down
on the cigarette table, pushing all these glasses out of the way. "How's your mother,
Holden?"
 "She's fine, thanks. I haven't seen her too recently, but the last I--"
 "Darling, if Holden needs anything, everything's in the linen closet. The top shelf.
I'm going to bed. I'm exhausted," Mrs. Antolini said. She looked it, too. "Can you boys
make up the couch by yourselves?"
 "We'll take care of everything. You run along to bed," Mr. Antolini said. He gave
Mrs. Antolini a kiss and she said good-by to me and went in the bedroom. They were
always kissing each other a lot in public.
 I had part of a cup of coffee and about half of some cake that was as hard as a
rock. All old Mr. Antolini had was another highball, though. He makes them strong, too,
you could tell. He may get to be an alcoholic if he doesn't watch his step.
 "I had lunch with your dad a couple of weeks ago," he said all of a sudden. "Did
you know that?"
 "No, I didn't."
 "You're aware, of course, that he's terribly concerned about you."
 "I know it. I know he is," I said.
 "Apparently before he phoned me he'd just had a long, rather harrowing letter
from your latest headmaster, to the effect that you were making absolutely no effort at all.
Cutting classes. Coming unprepared to all your classes. In general, being an all-around--"
 "I didn't cut any classes. You weren't allowed to cut any. There were a couple of
them I didn't attend once in a while, like that Oral Expression I told you about, but I
didn't cut any."
 I didn't feel at all like discussing it. The coffee made my stomach feel a little
better, but I still had this awful headache.
 Mr. Antolini lit another cigarette. He smoked like a fiend. Then he said, "Frankly,
I don't know what the hell to say to you, Holden."
 "I know. I'm very hard to talk to. I realize that."
 "I have a feeling that you're riding for some kind of a terrible, terrible fall. But I
don't honestly know what kind. . . Are you listening to me?"
 "Yes."
 You could tell he was trying to concentrate and all.
 "It may be the kind where, at the age of thirty, you sit in some bar hating
everybody who comes in looking as if he might have played football in college. Then
again, you may pick up just enough education to hate people who say, 'It's a secret
between he and I.' Or you may end up in some business office, throwing paper clips at the
nearest stenographer. I just don't know. But do you know what I'm driving at, at all?"
 "Yes. Sure," I said. I did, too. "But you're wrong about that hating business. I
mean about hating football players and all. You really are. I don't hate too many guys. 
What I may do, I may hate them for a little while, like this guy Stradlater I knew at
Pencey, and this other boy, Robert Ackley. I hated them once in a while--I admit it--but it
doesn't last too long, is what I mean. After a while, if I didn't see them, if they didn't
come in the room, or if I didn't see them in the dining room for a couple of meals, I sort
of missed them. I mean I sort of missed them."
 Mr. Antolini didn't say anything for a while. He got up and got another hunk of
ice and put it in his drink, then he sat down again. You could tell he was thinking. I kept
wishing, though, that he'd continue the conversation in the morning, instead of now, but
he was hot. People are mostly hot to have a discussion when you're not.
 "All right. Listen to me a minute now . . . I may not word this as memorably as I'd
like to, but I'll write you a letter about it in a day or two. Then you can get it all straight.
But listen now, anyway." He started concentrating again. Then he said, "This fall I think
you're riding for--it's a special kind of fall, a horrible kind. The man falling isn't permitted
to feel or hear himself hit bottom. He just keeps falling and falling. The whole
arrangement's designed for men who, at some time or other in their lives, were looking
for something their own environment couldn't supply them with. Or they thought their
own environment couldn't supply them with. So they gave up looking. They gave it up
before they ever really even got started. You follow me?"
 "Yes, sir."
 "Sure?"
 "Yes."
 He got up and poured some more booze in his glass. Then he sat down again. He
didn't say anything for a long time.
 "I don't want to scare you," he said, "but I can very clearly see you dying nobly,
one way or another, for some highly unworthy cause." He gave me a funny look. "If I
write something down for you, will you read it carefully? And keep it?"
 "Yes. Sure," I said. I did, too. I still have the paper he gave me.
 He went over to this desk on the other side of the room, and without sitting down
wrote something on a piece of paper. Then he came back and sat down with the paper in
his hand. "Oddly enough, this wasn't written by a practicing poet. It was written by a
psychoanalyst named Wilhelm Stekel. Here's what he--Are you still with me?"
 "Yes, sure I am."
 "Here's what he said: 'The mark of the immature man is that he wants to die nobly
for a cause, while the mark of the mature man is that he wants to live humbly for one.'"
 He leaned over and handed it to me. I read it right when he gave it to me, and then
I thanked him and all and put it in my pocket. It was nice of him to go to all that trouble.
It really was. The thing was, though, I didn't feel much like concentrating. Boy, I felt so
damn tired all of a sudden.
 You could tell he wasn't tired at all, though. He was pretty oiled up, for one thing.
"I think that one of these days," he said, "you're going to have to find out where you want
to go. And then you've got to start going there. But immediately. You can't afford to lose
a minute. Not you."
 I nodded, because he was looking right at me and all, but I wasn't too sure what he
was talking about. I was pretty sure I knew, but I wasn't too positive at the time. I was too
damn tired. 
 "And I hate to tell you," he said, "but I think that once you have a fair idea where
you want to go, your first move will be to apply yourself in school. You'll have to. You're
a student--whether the idea appeals to you or not. You're in love with knowledge. And I
think you'll find, once you get past all the Mr. Vineses and their Oral Comp--"
 "Mr. Vinsons," I said. He meant all the Mr. Vinsons, not all the Mr. Vineses. I
shouldn't have interrupted him, though.
 "All right--the Mr. Vinsons. Once you get past all the Mr. Vinsons, you're going
to start getting closer and closer--that is, if you want to, and if you look for it and wait for
it--to the kind of information that will be very, very dear to your heart. Among other
things, you'll find that you're not the first person who was ever confused and frightened
and even sickened by human behavior. You're by no means alone on that score, you'll be
excited and stimulated to know. Many, many men have been just as troubled morally and
spiritually as you are right now. Happily, some of them kept records of their troubles.
You'll learn from them--if you want to. Just as someday, if you have something to offer,
someone will learn something from you. It's a beautiful reciprocal arrangement. And it
isn't education. It's history. It's poetry." He stopped and took a big drink out of his
highball. Then he started again. Boy, he was really hot. I was glad I didn't try to stop him
or anything. "I'm not trying to tell you," he said, "that only educated and scholarly men
are able to contribute something valuable to the world. It's not so. But I do say that
educated and scholarly men, if they're brilliant and creative to begin with--which,
unfortunately, is rarely the case--tend to leave infinitely more valuable records behind
them than men do who are merely brilliant and creative. They tend to express themselves
more clearly, and they usually have a passion for following their thoughts through to the
end. And--most important--nine times out of ten they have more humility than the
unscholarly thinker. Do you follow me at all?"
 "Yes, sir."
 He didn't say anything again for quite a while. I don't know if you've ever done it,
but it's sort of hard to sit around waiting for somebody to say something when they're
thinking and all. It really is. I kept trying not to yawn. It wasn't that I was bored or
anything--I wasn't--but I was so damn sleepy all of a sudden.
 "Something else an academic education will do for you. If you go along with it
any considerable distance, it'll begin to give you an idea what size mind you have. What
it'll fit and, maybe, what it won't. After a while, you'll have an idea what kind of thoughts
your particular size mind should be wearing. For one thing, it may save you an
extraordinary amount of time trying on ideas that don't suit you, aren't becoming to you.
You'll begin to know your true measurements and dress your mind accordingly."
 Then, all of a sudden, I yawned. What a rude bastard, but I couldn't help it!
 Mr. Antolini just laughed, though. "C'mon," he said, and got up. "We'll fix up the
couch for you."
 I followed him and he went over to this closet and tried to take down some sheets
and blankets and stuff that was on the top shelf, but he couldn't do it with this highball
glass in his hand. So he drank it and then put the glass down on the floor and then he took
the stuff down. I helped him bring it over to the couch. We both made the bed together.
He wasn't too hot at it. He didn't tuck anything in very tight. I didn't care, though. I
could've slept standing up I was so tired.
 "How're all your women?" 
 "They're okay." I was being a lousy conversationalist, but I didn't feel like it.
 "How's Sally?" He knew old Sally Hayes. I introduced him once.
 "She's all right. I had a date with her this afternoon." Boy, it seemed like twenty
years ago! "We don't have too much in common any more."
 "Helluva pretty girl. What about that other girl? The one you told me about, in
Maine?"
 "Oh--Jane Gallagher. She's all right. I'm probably gonna give her a buzz
tomorrow."
 We were all done making up the couch then. "It's all yours," Mr. Antolini said. "I
don't know what the hell you're going to do with those legs of yours."
 "That's all right. I'm used to short beds," I said. "Thanks a lot, sir. You and Mrs.
Antolini really saved my life tonight."
 "You know where the bathroom is. If there's anything you want, just holler. I'll be
in the kitchen for a while--will the light bother you?"
 "No--heck, no. Thanks a lot."
 "All right. Good night, handsome."
 "G'night, sir. Thanks a lot."
 He went out in the kitchen and I went in the bathroom and got undressed and all. I
couldn't brush my teeth because I didn't have any toothbrush with me. I didn't have any
pajamas either and Mr. Antolini forgot to lend me some. So I just went back in the living
room and turned off this little lamp next to the couch, and then I got in bed with just my
shorts on. It was way too short for me, the couch, but I really could've slept standing up
without batting an eyelash. I laid awake for just a couple of seconds thinking about all
that stuff Mr. Antolini'd told me. About finding out the size of your mind and all. He was
really a pretty smart guy. But I couldn't keep my goddam eyes open, and I fell asleep.
 Then something happened. I don't even like to talk about it.
 I woke up all of a sudden. I don't know what time it was or anything, but I woke
up. I felt something on my head, some guy's hand. Boy, it really scared hell out of me.
What it was, it was Mr. Antolini's hand. What he was doing was, he was sitting on the
floor right next to the couch, in the dark and all, and he was sort of petting me or patting
me on the goddam head. Boy, I'll bet I jumped about a thousand feet.
 "What the hellya doing?" I said.
 "Nothing! I'm simply sitting here, admiring--"
 "What're ya doing, anyway?" I said over again. I didn't know what the hell to say-
-I mean I was embarrassed as hell.
 "How 'bout keeping your voice down? I'm simply sitting here--"
 "I have to go, anyway," I said--boy, was I nervous! I started putting on my damn
pants in the dark. I could hardly get them on I was so damn nervous. I know more damn
perverts, at schools and all, than anybody you ever met, and they're always being perverty
when I'm around.
 "You have to go where?" Mr. Antolini said. He was trying to act very goddam
casual and cool and all, but he wasn't any too goddam cool. Take my word.
 "I left my bags and all at the station. I think maybe I'd better go down and get
them. I have all my stuff in them."
 "They'll be there in the morning. Now, go back to bed. I'm going to bed myself.
What's the matter with you?" 
 "Nothing's the matter, it's just that all my money and stuff's in one of my bags. I'll
be right back. I'll get a cab and be right back," I said. Boy, I was falling all over myself in
the dark. "The thing is, it isn't mine, the money. It's my mother's, and I--"
 "Don't be ridiculous, Holden. Get back in that bed. I'm going to bed myself. The
money will be there safe and sound in the morn--"
 "No, no kidding. I gotta get going. I really do." I was damn near all dressed
already, except that I couldn't find my tie. I couldn't remember where I'd put my tie. I put
on my jacket and all without it. Old Mr. Antolini was sitting now in the big chair a little
ways away from me, watching me. It was dark and all and I couldn't see him so hot, but I
knew he was watching me, all right. He was still boozing, too. I could see his trusty
highball glass in his hand.
 "You're a very, very strange boy."
 "I know it," I said. I didn't even look around much for my tie. So I went without it.
"Good-by, sir," I said, "Thanks a lot. No kidding."
 He kept walking right behind me when I went to the front door, and when I rang
the elevator bell he stayed in the damn doorway. All he said was that business about my
being a "very, very strange boy" again. Strange, my ass. Then he waited in the doorway
and all till the goddam elevator came. I never waited so long for an elevator in my whole
goddam life. I swear.
 I didn't know what the hell to talk about while I was waiting for the elevator, and
he kept standing there, so I said, "I'm gonna start reading some good books. I really am."
I mean you had to say something. It was very embarrassing.
 "You grab your bags and scoot right on back here again. I'll leave the door
unlatched."
 "Thanks a lot," I said. "G'by!" The elevator was finally there. I got in and went
down. Boy, I was shaking like a madman. I was sweating, too. When something perverty
like that happens, I start sweating like a bastard. That kind of stuff's happened to me
about twenty times since I was a kid. I can't stand it.
25
 When I got outside, it was just getting light out. It was pretty cold, too, but it felt
good because I was sweating so much.
 I didn't know where the hell to go. I didn't want to go to another hotel and spend
all Phoebe's dough. So finally all I did was I walked over to Lexington and took the
subway down to Grand Central. My bags were there and all, and I figured I'd sleep in that
crazy waiting room where all the benches are. So that's what I did. It wasn't too bad for a
while because there weren't many people around and I could stick my feet up. But I don't
feel much like discussing it. It wasn't too nice. Don't ever try it. I mean it. It'll depress
you.
 I only slept till around nine o'clock because a million people started coming in the
waiting room and I had to take my feet down. I can't sleep so hot if I have to keep my feet
on the floor. So I sat up. I still had that headache. It was even worse. And I think I was
more depressed than I ever was in my whole life. 
 I didn't want to, but I started thinking about old Mr. Antolini and I wondered what
he'd tell Mrs. Antolini when she saw I hadn't slept there or anything. That part didn't
worry me too much, though, because I knew Mr. Antolini was very smart and that he
could make up something to tell her. He could tell her I'd gone home or something. That
part didn't worry me much. But what did worry me was the part about how I'd woke up
and found him patting me on the head and all. I mean I wondered if just maybe I was
wrong about thinking be was making a flitty pass at ne. I wondered if maybe he just liked
to pat guys on the head when they're asleep. I mean how can you tell about that stuff for
sure? You can't. I even started wondering if maybe I should've got my bags and gone
back to his house, the way I'd said I would. I mean I started thinking that even if he was a
flit he certainly'd been very nice to me. I thought how he hadn't minded it when I'd called
him up so late, and how he'd told me to come right over if I felt like it. And how he went
to all that trouble giving me that advice about finding out the size of your mind and all,
and how he was the only guy that'd even gone near that boy James Castle I told you about
when he was dead. I thought about all that stuff. And the more I thought about it, the
more depressed I got. I mean I started thinking maybe I should've gone back to his house.
Maybe he was only patting my head just for the hell of it. The more I thought about it,
though, the more depressed and screwed up about it I got. What made it even worse, my
eyes were sore as hell. They felt sore and burny from not getting too much sleep. Besides
that, I was getting sort of a cold, and I didn't even have a goddam handkerchief with me. I
had some in my suitcase, but I didn't feel like taking it out of that strong box and opening
it up right in public and all.
 There was this magazine that somebody'd left on the bench next to me, so I
started reading it, thinking it'd make me stop thinking about Mr. Antolini and a million
other things for at least a little while. But this damn article I started reading made me feel
almost worse. It was all about hormones. It described how you should look, your face and
eyes and all, if your hormones were in good shape, and I didn't look that way at all. I
looked exactly like the guy in the article with lousy hormones. So I started getting
worried about my hormones. Then I read this other article about how you can tell if you
have cancer or not. It said if you had any sores in your mouth that didn't heal pretty
quickly, it was a sign that you probably had cancer. I'd had this sore on the inside of my
lip for about two weeks. So figured I was getting cancer. That magazine was some little
cheerer upper. I finally quit reading it and went outside for a walk. I figured I'd be dead in
a couple of months because I had cancer. I really did. I was even positive I would be. It
certainly didn't make me feel too gorgeous. It'sort of looked like it was going to rain, but I
went for this walk anyway. For one thing, I figured I ought to get some breakfast. I wasn't
at all hungry, but I figured I ought to at least eat something. I mean at least get something
with some vitamins in it. So I started walking way over east, where the pretty cheap
restaurants are, because I didn't want to spend a lot of dough.
 While I was walking, I passed these two guys that were unloading this big
Christmas tree off a truck. One guy kept saying to the other guy, "Hold the sonuvabitch
up! Hold it up, for Chrissake!" It certainly was a gorgeous way to talk about a Christmas
tree. It was sort of funny, though, in an awful way, and I started to sort of laugh. It was
about the worst thing I could've done, because the minute I started to laugh I thought I
was going to vomit. I really did. I even started to, but it went away. I don't know why. I
mean I hadn't eaten anything unsanitary or like that and usually I have quite a strong 
stomach. Anyway, I got over it, and I figured I'd feel better if I had something to eat. So I
went in this very cheap-looking restaurant and had doughnuts and coffee. Only, I didn't
eat the doughnuts. I couldn't swallow them too well. The thing is, if you get very
depressed about something, it's hard as hell to swallow. The waiter was very nice,
though. He took them back without charging me. I just drank the coffee. Then I left and
started walking over toward Fifth Avenue.
 It was Monday and all, and pretty near Christmas, and all the stores were open. So
it wasn't too bad walking on Fifth Avenue. It was fairly Christmasy. All those scraggylooking
Santa Clauses were standing on corners ringing those bells, and the Salvation
Army girls, the ones that don't wear any lipstick or anything, were tinging bells too. I sort
of kept looking around for those two nuns I'd met at breakfast the day before, but I didn't
see them. I knew I wouldn't, because they'd told me they'd come to New York to be
schoolteachers, but I kept looking for them anyway. Anyway, it was pretty Christmasy all
of a sudden. A million little kids were downtown with their mothers, getting on and off
buses and coming in and out of stores. I wished old Phoebe was around. She's not little
enough any more to go stark staring mad in the toy department, but she enjoys horsing
around and looking at the people. The Christmas before last I took her downtown
shopping with me. We had a helluva time. I think it was in Bloomingdale's. We went in
the shoe department and we pretended she--old Phoebe-- wanted to get a pair of those
very high storm shoes, the kind that have about a million holes to lace up. We had the
poor salesman guy going crazy. Old Phoebe tried on about twenty pairs, and each time
the poor guy had to lace one shoe all the way up. It was a dirty trick, but it killed old
Phoebe. We finally bought a pair of moccasins and charged them. The salesman was very
nice about it. I think he knew we were horsing around, because old Phoebe always starts
giggling.
 Anyway, I kept walking and walking up Fifth Avenue, without any tie on or
anything. Then all of a sudden, something very spooky started happening. Every time I
came to the end of a block and stepped off the goddam curb, I had this feeling that I'd
never get to the other side of the street. I thought I'd just go down, down, down, and
nobody'd ever see me again. Boy, did it scare me. You can't imagine. I started sweating
like a bastard--my whole shirt and underwear and everything. Then I started doing
something else. Every time I'd get to the end of a block I'd make believe I was talking to
my brother Allie. I'd say to him, "Allie, don't let me disappear. Allie, don't let me
disappear. Allie, don't let me disappear. Please, Allie." And then when I'd reach the other
side of the street without disappearing, I'd thank him. Then it would start all over again as
soon as I got to the next corner. But I kept going and all. I was sort of afraid to stop, I
think--I don't remember, to tell you the truth. I know I didn't stop till I was way up in the
Sixties, past the zoo and all. Then I sat down on this bench. I could hardly get my breath,
and I was still sweating like a bastard. I sat there, I guess, for about an hour. Finally, what
I decided I'd do, I decided I'd go away. I decided I'd never go home again and I'd never
go away to another school again. I decided I'd just see old Phoebe and sort of say goodby
to her and all, and give her back her Christmas dough, and then I'd start hitchhiking
my way out West. What I'd do, I figured, I'd go down to the Holland Tunnel and bum a
ride, and then I'd bum another one, and another one, and another one, and in a few days
I'd be somewhere out West where it was very pretty and sunny and where nobody'd know
me and I'd get a job. I figured I could get a job at a filling station somewhere, putting gas 
and oil in people's cars. I didn't care what kind of job it was, though. Just so people didn't
know me and I didn't know anybody. I thought what I'd do was, I'd pretend I was one of
those deaf-mutes. That way I wouldn't have to have any goddam stupid useless
conversations with anybody. If anybody wanted to tell me something, they'd have to
write it on a piece of paper and shove it over to me. They'd get bored as hell doing that
after a while, and then I'd be through with having conversations for the rest of my life.
Everybody'd think I was just a poor deaf-mute bastard and they'd leave me alone. They'd
let me put gas and oil in their stupid cars, and they'd pay me a salary and all for it, and I'd
build me a little cabin somewhere with the dough I made and live there for the rest of my
life. I'd build it right near the woods, but not right in them, because I'd want it to be sunny
as hell all the time. I'd cook all my own food, and later on, if I wanted to get married or
something, I'd meet this beautiful girl that was also a deaf-mute and we'd get married.
She'd come and live in my cabin with me, and if she wanted to say anything to me, she'd
have to write it on a goddam piece of paper, like everybody else. If we had any children,
we'd hide them somewhere. We could buy them a lot of books and teach them how to
read and write by ourselves.
 I got excited as hell thinking about it. I really did. I knew the part about
pretending I was a deaf-mute was crazy, but I liked thinking about it anyway. But I really
decided to go out West and all. All I wanted to do first was say good-by to old Phoebe.
So all of a sudden, I ran like a madman across the street--I damn near got killed doing it,
if you want to know the truth--and went in this stationery store and bought a pad and
pencil. I figured I'd write her a note telling her where to meet me so I could say good-by
to her and give her back her Christmas dough, and then I'd take the note up to her school
and get somebody in the principal's office to give it to her. But I just put the pad and
pencil in my pocket and started walking fast as hell up to her school--I was too excited to
write the note right in the stationery store. I walked fast because I wanted her to get the
note before she went home for lunch, and I didn't have any too much time.
 I knew where her school was, naturally, because I went there myself when I was a
kid. When I got there, it felt funny. I wasn't sure I'd remember what it was like inside, but
I did. It was exactly the same as it was when I went there. They had that same big yard
inside, that was always sort of dark, with those cages around the light bulbs so they
wouldn't break if they got hit with a ball. They had those same white circles painted all
over the floor, for games and stuff. And those same old basketball rings without any nets-
-just the backboards and the rings.
 Nobody was around at all, probably because it wasn't recess period, and it wasn't
lunchtime yet. All I saw was one little kid, a colored kid, on his way to the bathroom. He
had one of those wooden passes sticking out of his hip pocket, the same way we used to
have, to show he had permission and all to go to the bathroom.
 I was still sweating, but not so bad any more. I went over to the stairs and sat
down on the first step and took out the pad and pencil I'd bought. The stairs had the same
smell they used to have when I went there. Like somebody'd just taken a leak on them.
School stairs always smell like that. Anyway, I sat there and wrote this note:
 DEAR PHOEBE,
 I can't wait around till Wednesday any more so I will 
 probably hitch hike out west this afternoon. Meet me at the
 Museum of art near the door at quarter past 12 if you can and I
 will give you your Christmas dough back. I didn't spend much.
 Love,
 HOLDEN
 Her school was practically right near the museum, and she had to pass it on her
way home for lunch anyway, so I knew she could meet me all right.
 Then I started walking up the stairs to the principal's office so I could give the
note to somebody that would bring it to her in her classroom. I folded it about ten times
so nobody'd open it. You can't trust anybody in a goddam school. But I knew they'd give
it to her if I was her brother and all.
 While I was walking up the stairs, though, all of a sudden I thought I was going to
puke again. Only, I didn't. I sat down for a second, and then I felt better. But while I was
sitting down, I saw something that drove me crazy. Somebody'd written "Fuck you" on
the wall. It drove me damn near crazy. I thought how Phoebe and all the other little kids
would see it, and how they'd wonder what the hell it meant, and then finally some dirty
kid would tell them--all cockeyed, naturally--what it meant, and how they'd all think
about it and maybe even worry about it for a couple of days. I kept wanting to kill
whoever'd written it. I figured it was some perverty bum that'd sneaked in the school late
at night to take a leak or something and then wrote it on the wall. I kept picturing myself
catching him at it, and how I'd smash his head on the stone steps till he was good and
goddam dead and bloody. But I knew, too, I wouldn't have the guts to do it. I knew that.
That made me even more depressed. I hardly even had the guts to rub it off the wall with
my hand, if you want to know the truth. I was afraid some teacher would catch me
rubbing it off and would think I'd written it. But I rubbed it out anyway, finally. Then I
went on up to the principal's office.
 The principal didn't seem to be around, but some old lady around a hundred years
old was sitting at a typewriter. I told her I was Phoebe Caulfield's brother, in 4B-1, and I
asked her to please give Phoebe the note. I said it was very important because my mother
was sick and wouldn't have lunch ready for Phoebe and that she'd have to meet me and
have lunch in a drugstore. She was very nice about it, the old lady. She took the note off
me and called some other lady, from the next office, and the other lady went to give it to
Phoebe. Then the old lady that was around a hundred years old and I shot the breeze for a
while, She was pretty nice, and I told her how I'd gone there to school, too, and my
brothers. She asked me where I went to school now, and I told her Pencey, and she said
Pencey was a very good school. Even if I'd wanted to, I wouldn't have had the strength to
straighten her out. Besides, if she thought Pencey was a very good school, let her think it.
You hate to tell new stuff to somebody around a hundred years old. They don't like to
hear it. Then, after a while, I left. It was funny. She yelled "Good luck!" at me the same
way old Spencer did when I left Pencey. God, how I hate it when somebody yells "Good
luck!" at me when I'm leaving somewhere. It's depressing.
 I went down by a different staircase, and I saw another "Fuck you" on the wall. I
tried to rub it off with my hand again, but this one was scratched on, with a knife or 
something. It wouldn't come off. It's hopeless, anyway. If you had a million years to do it
in, you couldn't rub out even half the "Fuck you" signs in the world. It's impossible.
 I looked at the clock in the recess yard, and it was only twenty to twelve, so I had
quite a lot of time to kill before I met old Phoebe. But I just walked over to the museum
anyway. There wasn't anyplace else to go. I thought maybe I might stop in a phone booth
and give old Jane Gallagher a buzz before I started bumming my way west, but I wasn't
in the mood. For one thing, I wasn't even sure she was home for vacation yet. So I just
went over to the museum, and hung around.
 While I was waiting around for Phoebe in the museum, right inside the doors and
all, these two little kids came up to me and asked me if I knew where the mummies were.
The one little kid, the one that asked me, had his pants open. I told him about it. So he
buttoned them up right where he was standing talking to me--he didn't even bother to go
behind a post or anything. He killed me. I would've laughed, but I was afraid I'd feel like
vomiting again, so I didn't. "Where're the mummies, fella?" the kid said again. "Ya
know?"
 I horsed around with the two of them a little bit. "The mummies? What're they?" I
asked the one kid.
 "You know. The mummies--them dead guys. That get buried in them toons and
all."
 Toons. That killed me. He meant tombs.
 "How come you two guys aren't in school?" I said.
 "No school t'day," the kid that did all the talking said. He was lying, sure as I'm
alive, the little bastard. I didn't have anything to do, though, till old Phoebe showed up, so
I helped them find the place where the mummies were. Boy, I used to know exactly
where they were, but I hadn't been in that museum in years.
 "You two guys so interested in mummies?" I said.
 "Yeah."
 "Can't your friend talk?" I said.
 "He ain't my friend. He's my brudda."
 "Can't he talk?" I looked at the one that wasn't doing any talking. "Can't you talk
at all?" I asked him.
 "Yeah," he said. "I don't feel like it."
 Finally we found the place where the mummies were, and we went in.
 "You know how the Egyptians buried their dead?" I asked the one kid.
 "Naa."
 "Well, you should. It's very interesting. They wrapped their faces up in these
cloths that were treated with some secret chemical. That way they could be buried in their
tombs for thousands of years and their faces wouldn't rot or anything. Nobody knows
how to do it except the Egyptians. Even modern science."
 To get to where the mummies were, you had to go down this very narrow sort of
hall with stones on the side that they'd taken right out of this Pharaoh's tomb and all. It
was pretty spooky, and you could tell the two hot-shots I was with weren't enjoying it too
much. They stuck close as hell to me, and the one that didn't talk at all practically was
holding onto my sleeve. "Let's go," he said to his brother. "I seen 'em awreddy. C'mon,
hey." He turned around and beat it.
 "He's got a yella streak a mile wide," the other one said. "So long!" He beat it too. 
 I was the only one left in the tomb then. I sort of liked it, in a way. It was so nice
and peaceful. Then, all of a sudden, you'd never guess what I saw on the wall. Another
"Fuck you." It was written with a red crayon or something, right under the glass part of
the wall, under the stones.
 That's the whole trouble. You can't ever find a place that's nice and peaceful,
because there isn't any. You may think there is, but once you get there, when you're not
looking, somebody'll sneak up and write "Fuck you" right under your nose. Try it
sometime. I think, even, if I ever die, and they stick me in a cemetery, and I have a
tombstone and all, it'll say "Holden Caulfield" on it, and then what year I was born and
what year I died, and then right under that it'll say "Fuck you." I'm positive, in fact.
 After I came out of the place where the mummies were, I had to go to the
bathroom. I sort of had diarrhea, if you want to know the truth. I didn't mind the diarrhea
part too much, but something else happened. When I was coming out of the can, right
before I got to the door, I sort of passed out. I was lucky, though. I mean I could've killed
myself when I hit the floor, but all I did was sort of land on my side. it was a funny thing,
though. I felt better after I passed out. I really did. My arm sort of hurt, from where I fell,
but I didn't feel so damn dizzy any more.
 It was about ten after twelve or so then, and so I went back and stood by the door
and waited for old Phoebe. I thought how it might be the last time I'd ever see her again.
Any of my relatives, I mean. I figured I'd probably see them again, but not for years. I
might come home when I was about thirty-five. I figured, in case somebody got sick and
wanted to see me before they died, but that would be the only reason I'd leave my cabin
and come back. I even started picturing how it would be when I came back. I knew my
mother'd get nervous as hell and start to cry and beg me to stay home and not go back to
my cabin, but I'd go anyway. I'd be casual as hell. I'd make her calm down, and then I'd
go over to the other side of the living room and take out this cigarette case and light a
cigarette, cool as all hell. I'd ask them all to visit me sometime if they wanted to, but I
wouldn't insist or anything. What I'd do, I'd let old Phoebe come out and visit me in the
summertime and on Christmas vacation and Easter vacation. And I'd let D.B. come out
and visit me for a while if he wanted a nice, quiet place for his writing, but he couldn't
write any movies in my cabin, only stories and books. I'd have this rule that nobody could
do anything phony when they visited me. If anybody tried to do anything phony, they
couldn't stay.
 All of a sudden I looked at the clock in the checkroom and it was twenty-five of
one. I began to get scared that maybe that old lady in the school had told that other lady
not to give old Phoebe my message. I began to get scared that maybe she'd told her to
burn it or something. It really scared hell out of me. I really wanted to see old Phoebe
before I hit the road. I mean I had her Christmas dough and all.
 Finally, I saw her. I saw her through the glass part of the door. The reason I saw
her, she had my crazy hunting hat on--you could see that hat about ten miles away.
 I went out the doors and started down these stone stairs to meet her. The thing I
couldn't understand, she had this big suitcase with her. She was just coming across Fifth
Avenue, and she was dragging this goddam big suitcase with her. She could hardly drag
it. When I got up closer, I saw it was my old suitcase, the one I used to use when I was at
Whooton. I couldn't figure out what the hell she was doing with it. "Hi," she said when
she got up close. She was all out of breath from that crazy suitcase. 
 "I thought maybe you weren't coming," I said. "What the hell's in that bag? I don't
need anything. I'm just going the way I am. I'm not even taking the bags I got at the
station. What the hellya got in there?"
 She put the suitcase down. "My clothes," she said. "I'm going with you. Can I?
Okay?"
 "What?" I said. I almost fell over when she said that. I swear to God I did. I got
sort of dizzy and I thought I was going to pass out or something again.
 "I took them down the back elevator so Charlene wouldn't see me. It isn't heavy.
All I have in it is two dresses and my moccasins and my underwear and socks and some
other things. Feel it. It isn't heavy. Feel it once. . . Can't I go with you? Holden? Can't I?
Please."
 "No. Shut up."
 I thought I was going to pass out cold. I mean I didn't mean to tell her to shut up
and all, but I thought I was going to pass out again.
 "Why can't I? Please, Holden! I won't do anything-- I'll just go with you, that's all!
I won't even take my clothes with me if you don't want me to--I'll just take my--"
 "You can't take anything. Because you're not going. I'm going alone. So shut up."
 "Please, Holden. Please let me go. I'll be very, very, very--You won't even--"
 "You're not going. Now, shut up! Gimme that bag," I said. I took the bag off her. I
was almost all set to hit her, I thought I was going to smack her for a second. I really did.
 She started to cry.
 "I thought you were supposed to be in a play at school and all I thought you were
supposed to be Benedict Arnold in that play and all," I said. I said it very nasty.
"Whuddaya want to do? Not be in the play, for God's sake?" That made her cry even
harder. I was glad. All of a sudden I wanted her to cry till her eyes practically dropped
out. I almost hated her. I think I hated her most because she wouldn't be in that play any
more if she went away with me.
 "Come on," I said. I started up the steps to the museum again. I figured what I'd
do was, I'd check the crazy suitcase she'd brought in the checkroom, andy then she could
get it again at three o'clock, after school. I knew she couldn't take it back to school with
her. "Come on, now," I said.
 She didn't go up the steps with me, though. She wouldn't come with me. I went up
anyway, though, and brought the bag in the checkroom and checked it, and then I came
down again. She was still standing there on the sidewalk, but she turned her back on me
when I came up to her. She can do that. She can turn her back on you when she feels like
it. "I'm not going away anywhere. I changed my mind. So stop crying, and shut up," I
said. The funny part was, she wasn't even crying when I said that. I said it anyway,
though, "C'mon, now. I'll walk you back to school. C'mon, now. You'll be late."
 She wouldn't answer me or anything. I sort of tried to get hold of her old hand, but
she wouldn't let me. She kept turning around on me.
 "Didja have your lunch? Ya had your lunch yet?" I asked her.
 She wouldn't answer me. All she did was, she took off my red hunting hat--the
one I gave her--and practically chucked it right in my face. Then she turned her back on
me again. It nearly killed me, but I didn't say anything. I just picked it up and stuck it in
my coat pocket.
 "Come on, hey. I'll walk you back to school," I said. 
 "I'm not going back to school."
 I didn't know what to say when she said that. I just stood there for a couple of
minutes.
 "You have to go back to school. You want to be in that play, don't you? You want
to be Benedict Arnold, don't you?"
 "No."
 "Sure you do. Certainly you do. C'mon, now, let's go," I said. "In the first place,
I'm not going away anywhere, I told you. I'm going home. I'm going home as soon as you
go back to school. First I'm gonna go down to the station and get my bags, and then I'm
gonna go straight--"
 "I said I'm not going back to school. You can do what you want to do, but I'm not
going back to chool," she said. "So shut up." It was the first time she ever told me to shut
up. It sounded terrible. God, it sounded terrible. It sounded worse than swearing. She still
wouldn't look at me either, and every time I sort of put my hand on her shoulder or
something, she wouldn't let me.
 "Listen, do you want to go for a walk?" I asked her. "Do you want to take a walk
down to the zoo? If I let you not go back to school this afternoon and go for walk, will
you cut out this crazy stuff?"
 She wouldn't answer me, so I said it over again. "If I let you skip school this
afternoon and go for a little walk, will you cut out the crazy stuff? Will you go back to
school tomorrow like a good girl?"
 "I may and I may not," she said. Then she ran right the hell across the street,
without even looking to see if any cars were coming. She's a madman sometimes.
 I didn't follow her, though. I knew she'd follow me, so I started walking
downtown toward the zoo, on the park side of the street, and she started walking
downtown on the other goddam side of the street, She wouldn't look over at me at all, but
I could tell she was probably watching me out of the corner of her crazy eye to see where
I was going and all. Anyway, we kept walking that way all the way to the zoo. The only
thing that bothered me was when a double-decker bus came along because then I couldn't
see across the street and I couldn't see where the hell she was. But when we got to the
zoo, I yelled over to her, "Phoebe! I'm going in the zoo! C'mon, now!" She wouldn't look
at me, but I could tell she heard me, and when I started down the steps to the zoo I turned
around and saw she was crossing the street and following me and all.
 There weren't too many people in the zoo because it was sort of a lousy day, but
there were a few around the sea lions' swimming pool and all. I started to go by but old
Phoebe stopped and made out she was watching the sea lions getting fed--a guy was
throwing fish at them--so I went back. I figured it was a good chance to catch up with her
and all. I went up and sort of stood behind her and sort of put my hands on her shoulders,
but she bent her knees and slid out from me--she can certainly be very snotty when she
wants to. She kept standing there while the sea lions were getting fed and I stood right
behind her. I didn't put my hands on her shoulders again or anything because if I had she
really would've beat it on me. Kids are funny. You have to watch what you're doing.
 She wouldn't walk right next to me when we left the sea lions, but she didn't walk
too far away. She sort of walked on one side of the sidewalk and I walked on the other
side. It wasn't too gorgeous, but it was better than having her walk about a mile away
from me, like before. We went up and watched the bears, on that little hill, for a while, 
but there wasn't much to watch. Only one of the bears was out, the polar bear. The other
one, the brown one, was in his goddam cave and wouldn't come out. All you could see
was his rear end. There was a little kid standing next to me, with a cowboy hat on
practically over his ears, and he kept telling his father, "Make him come out, Daddy.
Make him come out." I looked at old Phoebe, but she wouldn't laugh. You know kids
when they're sore at you. They won't laugh or anything.
 After we left the bears, we left the zoo and crossed over this little street in the
park, and then we went through one of those little tunnels that always smell from
somebody's taking a leak. It was on the way to the carrousel. Old Phoebe still wouldn't
talk to me or anything, but she was sort of walking next to me now. I took a hold of the
belt at the back of her coat, just for the hell of it, but she wouldn't let me. She said, "Keep
your hands to yourself, if you don't mind." She was still sore at me. But not as sore as she
was before. Anyway, we kept getting closer and closer to the carrousel and you could
start to hear that nutty music it always plays. It was playing "Oh, Marie!" It played that
same song about fifty years ago when I was a little kid. That's one nice thing about
carrousels, they always play the same songs.
 "I thought the carrousel was closed in the wintertime," old Phoebe said. It was the
first time she practically said anything. She probably forgot she was supposed to be sore
at me.
 "Maybe because it's around Christmas," I said.
 She didn't say anything when I said that. She probably remembered she was
supposed to be sore at me.
 "Do you want to go for a ride on it?" I said. I knew she probably did. When she
was a tiny little kid, and Allie and D.B. and I used to go to the park with her, she was
mad about the carrousel. You couldn't get her off the goddam thing.
 "I'm too big." she said. I thought she wasn't going to answer me, but she did.
 "No, you're not. Go on. I'll wait for ya. Go on," I said. We were right there then.
There were a few kids riding on it, mostly very little kids, and a few parents were waiting
around outside, sitting on the benches and all. What I did was, I went up to the window
where they sell the tickets and bought old Phoebe a ticket. Then I gave it to her. She was
standing right next to me. "Here," I said. "Wait a second--take the rest of your dough,
too." I started giving her the rest of the dough she'd lent me.
 "You keep it. Keep it for me," she said. Then she said right afterward--"Please."
 That's depressing, when somebody says "please" to you. I mean if it's Phoebe or
somebody. That depressed the hell out of me. But I put the dough back in my pocket.
 "Aren't you gonna ride, too?" she asked me. She was looking at me sort of funny.
You could tell she wasn't too sore at me any more.
 "Maybe I will the next time. I'll watch ya," I said. "Got your ticket?"
 "Yes."
 "Go ahead, then--I'll be on this bench right over here. I'll watch ya." I went over
and sat down on this bench, and she went and got on the carrousel. She walked all around
it. I mean she walked once all the way around it. Then she sat down on this big, brown,
beat-up-looking old horse. Then the carrousel started, and I watched her go around and
around. There were only about five or six other kids on the ride, and the song the
carrousel was playing was "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes." It was playing it very jazzy and
funny. All the kids kept trying to grab for the gold ring, and so was old Phoebe, and I was 
sort of afraid she'd fall off the goddam horse, but I didn't say anything or do anything.
The thing with kids is, if they want to grab the gold ring, you have to let them do it, and
not say anything. If they fall off they fall off, but it's bad if you say anything to them.
 When the ride was over she got off her horse and came over to me. "You ride
once, too, this time," she said.
 "No, I'll just watch ya. I think I'll just watch," I said. I gave her some more of her
dough. "Here. Get some more tickets."
 She took the dough off me. "I'm not mad at you any more," she said.
 "I know. Hurry up--the thing's gonna start again."
 Then all of a sudden she gave me a kiss. Then she held her hand out, and said,
"It's raining. It's starting to rain."
 "I know."
 Then what she did--it damn near killed me--she reached in my coat pocket and
took out my red hunting hat and put it on my head.
 "Don't you want it?" I said.
 "You can wear it a while."
 "Okay. Hurry up, though, now. You're gonna miss your ride. You won't get your
own horse or anything."
 She kept hanging around, though.
 "Did you mean it what you said? You really aren't going away anywhere? Are
you really going home afterwards?" she asked me.
 "Yeah," I said. I meant it, too. I wasn't lying to her. I really did go home
afterwards. "Hurry up, now," I said. "The thing's starting."
 She ran and bought her ticket and got back on the goddam carrousel just in time.
Then she walked all the way around it till she got her own horse back. Then she got on it.
She waved to me and I waved back.
 Boy, it began to rain like a bastard. In buckets, I swear to God. All the parents and
mothers and everybody went over and stood right under the roof of the carrousel, so they
wouldn't get soaked to the skin or anything, but I stuck around on the bench for quite a
while. I got pretty soaking wet, especially my neck and my pants. My hunting hat really
gave me quite a lot of protection, in a way; but I got soaked anyway. I didn't care, though.
I felt so damn happy all of sudden, the way old Phoebe kept going around and around. I
was damn near bawling, I felt so damn happy, if you want to know the truth. I don't know
why. It was just that she looked so damn nice, the way she kept going around and around,
in her blue coat and all. God, I wish you could've been there.
26
 That's all I'm going to tell about. I could probably tell you what I did after I went
home, and how I got sick and all, and what school I'm supposed to go to next fall, after I
get out of here, but I don't feel like it. I really don't. That stuff doesn't interest me too
much right now.
 A lot of people, especially this one psychoanalyst guy they have here, keeps
asking me if I'm going apply myself when I go back to school next September. It's such a
stupid question, in my opinion. I mean how do you know what you're going to do till you 
do it? The answer is, you don't. I think I am, but how do I know? I swear it's a stupid
question.
 D.B. isn't as bad as the rest of them, but he keeps asking me a lot of questions,
too. He drove over last Saturday with this English babe that's in this new picture he's
writing. She was pretty affected, but very good-looking. Anyway, one time when she
went to the ladies' room way the hell down in the other wing D.B. asked me what I
thought about all this stuff I just finished telling you about. I didn't know what the hell to
say. If you want to know the truth, I don't know what I think about it. I'm sorry I told so
many people about it. About all I know is, I sort of miss everybody I told about. Even old
Stradlater and Ackley, for instance. I think I even miss that goddam Maurice. It's funny.
Don't ever tell anybody anything. If you do, you start missing everybody. 

failure or malfunction of the Bookshare Web Site

(www.bookshare.org) or because of any inaccuracy or lack of

completeness of any content that you download from the Web Site.

BOOKSHARE, AND THE AUTHORS, PUBLISHERS AND

COPYRIGHT OWNERS OF THE MATERIALS, SHALL NOT IN

ANY CASE BE LIABLE

aircraft had overflown the community twice. He had seen it both

times. Squinting toward the sky, he had seen the sleek jet, almost a

blur at its high speed, go past, and a second later heard the blast of

sound that followed. Then one more time, a moment later, from the

opposite direction, the same plane.

At first, he had been only fascinated. He had never seen aircraft so

close, for it was against the rules for Pilots to fly over the

community. Occasionally, when supplies were delivered by cargo

planes to the landing field across the river, the children rode their

bicycles to the riverbank and watched, intrigued, the unloading and

then the takeoff directed to the west, always away from the

community.

But the aircraft a year ago had been different. It was not a squat,

fat-bellied cargo plane but a needle-nosed single-pilot jet. Jonas,

looking around anxiously, had seen others--adults as well as

children--stop what they were doing and wait, confused, for an

explanation of the frightening event.

2

Then all of the citizens had been ordered to go into the nearest

building and stay there. IMMEDIATELY, the rasping voice through

the speakers had said. LEAVE YOUR BICYCLES WHERE THEY

ARE.

Instantly, obediently, Jonas had dropped his bike on its side on the

path behind his family's dwelling. He had run indoors and stayed

there, alone. His parents were both at work, and his little sister, Lily,

was at the Childcare Center where she spent her after-school

hours.

Looking through the front window, he had seen no people: none of

the busy afternoon crew of Street Cleaners, Landscape Workers,

The Giver Page 7 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

and Food Delivery people who usually populated the community at

that time of day. He saw only the abandoned bikes here and there

on their sides; an upturned wheel on one was still revolving slowly.

He had been frightened then. The sense of his own community

silent, waiting, had made his stomach churn. He had trembled.

But it had been nothing. Within minutes the speakers had crackled

again, and the voice, reassuring now and less urgent, had

explained that a Pilot-in-Training had misread his navigational

instructions and made a wrong turn. Desperately the Pilot had been

trying to make his way back before his error was noticed.

NEEDLESS TO SAY, HE WILL BE RELEASED, the voice had said,

followed by silence. There was an ironic tone to that final message,

as if the Speaker found it amusing; and Jonas had smiled a little,

though he knew what a grim statement it had been. For a

contributing citizen to be released from the community was a final

decision, a terrible punishment, an overwhelming statement of

failure.

3

Even the children were scolded if they used the term lightly at play,

jeering at a teammate who missed a catch or stumbled in a race.

Jonas had done it once, had shouted at his best friend, "That's it,

Asher! You're released!" when Asher's clumsy error had lost a

match for his team. He had been taken aside for a brief and serious

talk by the coach, had hung his head with guilt and embarrassment,

and apologized to Asher after the game.

Now, thinking about the feeling of fear as he pedaled home along

the river path, he remembered that moment of palpable, stomach-
sinking terror when the aircraft had streaked above. It was not what

he was feeling now with December approaching. He searched for

The Giver Page 8 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

the right word to describe his own feeling.

Jonas was careful about language. Not like his friend, Asher, who

talked too fast and mixed things up, scrambling words and phrases

until they were barely recognizable and often very funny.

Jonas grinned, remembering the morning that Asher had dashed

into the classroom, late as usual, arriving breathlessly in the middle

of the chanting of the morning anthem. When the class took their

seats at the conclusion of the patriotic hymn, Asher remained

standing to make his public apology as was required.

"I apologize for inconveniencing my learning community." Asher ran

through the standard apology phrase rapidly, still catching his

breath. The Instructor and class waited patiently for his explanation.

The students had all been grinning, because they had listened to

Asher's explanations so many times before.

"I left home at the correct time but when I was riding

4

along near the hatchery, the crew was separating some salmon. I

guess I just got distraught, watching them.

"I apologize to my classmates," Asher concluded. He smoothed his

rumpled tunic and sat down.

"We accept your apology, Asher." The class recited the standard

response in unison. Many of the students were biting their lips to

keep from laughing.

"I accept your apology, Asher," the Instructor said. He was smiling.

"And I thank you, because once again you have provided an

opportunity for a lesson in language. 'Distraught' is too strong an

The Giver Page 9 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

adjective to describe salmon-viewing." He turned and wrote

"distraught" on the instructional board. Beside it he wrote

"distracted."

Jonas, nearing his home now, smiled at the recollection. Thinking,

still, as he wheeled his bike into its narrow port beside the door, he

realized that frightened was the wrong word to describe his

feelings, now that December was almost here. It was too strong an

adjective.

He had waited a long time for this special December. Now that it

was almost upon him, he wasn't frightened, but he was ... eager, he

decided. He was eager for it to come. And he was excited,

certainly. All of the Elevens were excited about the event that would

be coming so soon.

But there was a little shudder of nervousness when he thought

about it, about what might happen.

Apprehensive, Jonas decided. That's what I am.

"Who wants to be the first tonight, for feelings?" Jonas's father

asked, at the conclusion of their evening meal.

It was one of the rituals, the evening telling of feelings.

5

Sometimes Jonas and his sister, Lily, argued over turns, over who

would get to go first. Their parents, of course, were part of the

ritual; they, too, told their feelings each evening. But like all parents-

-all adults--they didn't fight and wheedle for their turn.

Nor did Jonas, tonight. His feelings were too complicated this

evening. He wanted to share them, but he wasn't eager to begin the

The Giver Page 10 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

process of sifting through his own complicated emotions, even with

the help that he knew his parents could give.

"You go, Lily," he said, seeing his sister, who was much younger--

only a Seven--wiggling with impatience in her chair.

"I felt very angry this afternoon," Lily announced. "My Childcare

group was at the play area, and we had a visiting group of Sevens,

and they didn't obey the rules at all. One of them--a male; I don't

know his name--kept going right to the front of the line for the slide,

even though the rest of us were all waiting. I felt so angry at him. I

made my hand into a fist, like this." She held up a clenched fist and

the rest of the family smiled at her small defiant gesture.

"Why do you think the visitors didn't obey the rules?" Mother asked.

Lily considered, and shook her head. "I don't know. They acted

like ... like ... "

"Animals?" Jonas suggested. He laughed.

"That's right," Lily said, laughing too. "Like animals." Neither child

knew what the word meant, exactly, but it was often used to

describe someone uneducated or clumsy, someone who didn't fit

in.

6

"Where were the visitors from?" Father asked.

Lily frowned, trying to remember. "Our leader told us, when he

made the welcome speech, but I can't remember. I guess I wasn't

paying attention. It was from another community. They had to leave

very early, and they had their midday meal on the bus."

Mother nodded. "Do you think it's possible that their rules may be

The Giver Page 11 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

different? And so they simply didn't know what your play area rules

were?"

Lily shrugged, and nodded. "I suppose."

"You've visited other communities, haven't you?" Jonas asked. "My

group has, often."

Lily nodded again. "When we were Sixes, we went and shared a

whole school day with a group of Sixes in their community."

"How did you feel when you were there?"

Lily frowned. "I felt strange. Because their methods were different.

They were learning usages that my group hadn't learned yet, so we

felt stupid."

Father was listening with interest. "I'm thinking, Lily," he said,

"about the boy who didn't obey the rules today. Do you think it's

possible that he felt strange and stupid, being in a new place with

rules that he didn't know about?"

Lily pondered that. "Yes," she said, finally.

"I feel a little sorry for him," Jonas said, "even though I don't even

know him. I feel sorry for anyone who is in a place where he feels

strange and stupid."

"How do you feel now, Lily?" Father asked. "Still angry?"

"I guess not," Lily decided. "I guess I feel a little sorry for him. And

sorry I made a fist." She grinned.

7

Jonas smiled back at his sister. Lily's feelings were always

The Giver Page 12 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

straightforward, fairly simple, usually easy to resolve. .He guessed

that his own had been, too, when he was a Seven.

He listened politely, though not very attentively, while his father

took his turn, describing a feeling of worry that he'd had that day at

work: a concern about one of the newchildren who wasn't doing

well. Jonas's father's title was Nurturer. He and the other Nurturers

were responsible for all the physical and emotional needs of every

newchild during its earliest life. It was a very important job, Jonas

knew, but it wasn't one that interested him much.

"What gender is it?" Lily asked.

"Male," Father said. "He's a sweet little male with a lovely

disposition. But he isn't growing as fast as he should, and he

doesn't sleep soundly. We have him in the extra care section for

supplementary nurturing, but the committee's beginning to talk

about releasing him."

"Oh, no," Mother murmured sympathetically. "I know how sad that

must make you feel."

Jonas and Lily both nodded sympathetically as well. Release of

newchildren was always sad, because they hadn't had a chance to

enjoy life within the community yet. And they hadn't done anything

wrong.

There were only two occasions of release which were not

punishment. Release of the elderly, which was a time of celebration

for a life well and fully lived; and release of a newchild, which

always brought a sense of what-could-we- have-done. This was

especially troubling for the Nurturers, like Father, who felt they had

failed somehow. But it happened very rarely.

"Well," Father said, "I'm going to keep trying. I may

The Giver Page 13 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

8

ask the committee for permission to bring him here at night, if you

don't mind. You know what the night-crew Nurturers are like. I think

this little guy needs something extra."

"Of course," Mother said, and Jonas and Lily nodded. They had

heard Father complain about the night crew before. It was a lesser

job, night-crew nurturing, assigned to those who lacked the interest

or skills or insight for the more vital jobs of the daytime hours. Most

of the people on the night crew had not even been given spouses

because they lacked, somehow, the essential capacity to connect

to others, which was required for the creation of a family unit.

"Maybe we could even keep him," Lily suggested sweetly, trying to

look innocent. The .look was fake, Jonas knew; they all knew.

"Lily," Mother reminded her, smiling, "you know the rules."

Two children--one male, one female--to each family unit. It was

written very clearly in the rules.

Lily giggled. "Well," she said, "I thought maybe just this once."

Next, Mother, who held a prominent position at the Department of

Justice, talked about her feelings. Today a repeat offender had

been brought before her, someone who had broken the rules

before. Someone who she hoped had been adequately and fairly

punished, and who had been restored to his place: to his job, his

home, his family unit. To see him brought before her a second time

caused her overwhelming feelings of frustration and anger. And

even

9

The Giver Page 14 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

guilt, that she hadn't made a difference in his life.

"I feel frightened, too, for him," she confessed. "You know that

there's no third chance. The rules say that if there's a third

transgression, he simply has to be released." Jonas shivered. He

knew it happened. There was even a boy in his group of Elevens

whose father had been released years before. No one ever

mentioned it; the disgrace was unspeakable. It was hard to

imagine.

Lily stood up and went to her mother. She stroked her mother's

arm.

From his place at the table, Father reached over and took her hand.

Jonas reached for the other.

One by one, they comforted her. Soon she smiled, thanked them,

and murmured that she felt soothed.

The ritual continued. "Jonas?" Father asked. "You're last, tonight."

Jonas sighed. This evening he almost would have preferred to keep

his feelings hidden. But it was, of course, against the rules.

"I'm feeling apprehensive," he confessed, glad that the appropriate

descriptive word had finally come to him. "Why is that, son?" His

father looked concerned.

"I know there's really nothing to worry about," Jonas explained,

"and that every adult has been through it. I know you have, Father,

and you too, Mother. But it's the Ceremony that I'm apprehensive

about. It's almost December."

Lily looked up, her eyes wide. "The Ceremony of Twelve," she

whispered in an awed voice. Even the smallest children--Lily's age

and younger--knew that it lay in the future for each of them.

The Giver Page 15 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

10

"I'm glad you told us of your feelings," Father said.

"Lily," Mother said, beckoning to the little girl, "Go on now and get

into your nightclothes. Father and I are going to stay here and talk

to Jonas for a while."

Lily sighed, but obediently she got down from her chair. "Privately?"

she asked.

Mother nodded. "Yes," she said, "this talk will be a private one with

Jonas."

11

2

Jonas watched as his father poured a fresh cup of coffee. He

waited.

"You know," his father finally said, "every December was exciting to

me when I was young. And it has been for you and Lily, too, I'm

sure. Each December brings such changes."

Jonas nodded. He could remember the Decembers back to when

he had become, well, probably a Four. The earlier ones were lost to

him. But he observed them each year, and he remembered Lily's

earliest Decembers. He remembered when his family received Lily,

the day she was named, the day that she had become a One.

The Ceremony for the Ones was always noisy and fun. Each

December, all the newchildren born in the previous year turned

One. One at a time--there were always fifty in each year's group, if

none had been released --they had been brought to the stage by

The Giver Page 16 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

the Nurturers who had cared for them since birth. Some were

already walking, wobbly on their unsteady legs; others were no

more than a few days old, wrapped in blankets, held by their

Nurturers.

"I enjoy the Naming," Jonas said.

His mother agreed, smiling. "The year we got Lily, we

12

knew, of course, that we'd receive our female, because we'd made

our application and been approved. But I'd been wondering and

wondering what her name would be."

"I could have sneaked a look at the list prior to the ceremony,"

Father confided. "The committee always makes the list in advance,

and it's right there in the office at the Nurturing Center.

"As a matter of fact," he went on, "I feel a little guilty about this. But

I did go in this afternoon and looked to see if this year's Naming list

had been made yet. It was right there in the office, and I looked up

number Thirty-six--that's the little guy I've been concerned about--

because it occurred to me that it might enhance his nurturing if I

could call him by a name. Just privately, of course, when no one

else is around."

"Did you find it?" Jonas asked. He was fascinated. It didn't seem a

terribly important rule, but the fact that his father had broken a rule

at all awed him. He glanced at his mother, the one responsible for

adherence to the rules, and was relieved that she was smiling.

His father nodded. "His name--if he makes it to the Naming without

being released, of course--is to be Gabriel. So I whisper that to him

when I feed him every four hours, and during exercise and

The Giver Page 17 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

playtime. If no one can hear me.

"I call him Gabe, actually," he said, and grinned. "Gabe." Jonas

tried it out. A good name, he decided. Though Jonas had only

become a Five the year that they acquired Lily and learned her

name, he remembered the excitement, the conversations at home,

wondering about her: how she would look, who she would be, how

13

she would fit into their established family unit. He remembered

climbing the steps to the stage with his parents, his father by his

side that year instead of with the Nurturers, since it was the year

that he would be given a newchild of his own.

He remembered his mother taking the newchild, his sister, into her

arms, while the document was read to the assembled family units.

"Newchild Twenty-three," the Namer had read. "Lily."

He remembered his father's look of delight, and that his father had

whispered, "She's one of my favorites. I was hoping for her to be

the one." The crowd had clapped, and Jonas had grinned. He liked

his sister's name. Lily, barely awake, had waved her small fist.

Then they had stepped down to make room for the next family unit.

"When I was an Eleven," his father said now, "as you are, Jonas, I

was very impatient, waiting for the Ceremony of Twelve. It's a long

two days. I remember that I enjoyed the Ones, as I always do, but

that I didn't pay much attention to the other ceremonies, except for

my sister's. She became a Nine that year, and got her bicycle. I'd

been teaching her to ride mine, even though technically I wasn't

supposed to."

Jonas laughed. It was one of the few rules that was not taken very

seriously and was almost always broken. The children all received

The Giver Page 18 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

their bicycles at Nine; they were not allowed to ride bicycles before

then. But almost always, the older brothers and sisters had secretly

taught the younger ones. Jonas had been thinking already about

teaching Lily.

There was talk about changing the rule and giving the bicycles at

an earlier age. A committee was studying

14

the idea. When something went to a committee for study, the

people always joked about it. They said that the committee

members would become Elders by the time the rule change was

made.

Rules were very hard to change. Sometimes, if it was a very

important rule--unlike the one governing the age for bicycles--it

would have to go, eventually, to The Receiver for a decision. The

Receiver was the most important Elder. Jonas had never even

seen him, that he knew of; someone in a position of such

importance lived and worked alone. But the committee would never

bother The Receiver with a question about bicycles; they would

simply fret and argue about it themselves for years, until the

citizens forgot that it had ever gone to them for study.

His father continued. "So I watched and cheered when my sister,

Katya, became a Nine and removed her hair ribbons and got her

bicycle," Father went on. "Then I didn't pay much attention to the

Tens and Elevens. And finally, at the end of the second day, which

seemed to go on forever, it was my turn. It was the Ceremony of

Twelve."

Jonas shivered. He pictured his father, who must have been a shy

and quiet boy, for he was a shy and quiet man, seated with his

group, waiting to be called to the stage. The Ceremony of Twelve

The Giver Page 19 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

was the last of the Ceremonies. The most important.

"I remember how proud my parents looked--and my sister, too;

even though she wanted to be out riding the bicycle publicly, she

stopped fidgeting and was very still and attentive when my turn

came.

"But to be honest, Jonas," his father said, "for me there

15

was not the element of suspense that there is with your Ceremony.

Because I was already fairly certain of what my Assignment was to

be."

Jonas was surprised. There was no way, really, to know in

advance. It was a secret selection, made by the leaders of the

community, the Committee of Elders, who took the responsibility so

seriously that there were never even any jokes made about

Assignments.

His mother seemed surprised, too. "How could you have known?"

she asked.

His father smiled his gentle smile. "Well, it was clear to me--and my

parents later confessed that it had been obvious to them, too--what

my aptitude was. I had always loved the newchildren more than

anything. When my friends in my age group were holding bicycle

races, or building toy vehicles or bridges with their construction

sets, or--

"All the things I do with my friends," Jonas pointed out, and his

mother nodded in agreement.

"I always participated, of course, because as children we must

The Giver Page 20 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

experience all of those things. And I studied hard in school, as you

do, Jonas. But again and again, during free time, I found myself

drawn to the newchildren. I spent almost all of my volunteer hours

helping in the Nurturing Center. Of course the Elders knew that,

from their observation."

Jonas nodded. During the past year he had been aware of the

increasing level of observation. In school, at recreation time, and

during volunteer hours, he had noticed the Elders watching him and

the other Elevens. He had seen them taking notes. He knew, too,

that the Elders were

16

meeting for long hours with all of the instructors that he and the

other Elevens had had during their years of school.

"So I expected it, and I was pleased, but not at all surprised, when

my Assignment was announced as Nurturer," Father explained.

"Did everyone applaud, even though they weren't surprised?"

Jonas asked.

"Oh, of course. They were happy for me, that my Assignment was

what I wanted most. I felt very fortunate." His father smiled.

"Were any of the Elevens disappointed, your year?" Jonas asked.

Unlike his father, he had no idea what his Assignment would be.

But he knew that some would disappoint him. Though he respected

his father's work, Nurturer would not be his wish. And he didn't envy

Laborers at all.

His father thought. "No, I don't think so. Of course the Elders are so

careful in their observations and selections."

The Giver Page 21 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"I think it's probably the most important job in our community," his

mother commented.

"My friend Yoshiko was surprised by her selection as Doctor,"

Father said, "but she was thrilled. And let's see, there was Andrei--I

remember that when we were boys he never wanted to do physical

things. He spent all the recreation time he could with his

construction set, and his volunteer hours were always on building

sites. The Elders knew that, of course. Andrei was given the

Assignment of Engineer and he was delighted."

"Andrei later designed the bridge that crosses the river to the west

of town," Jonas's mother said. "It wasn't there when we were

children."

17

"There are very rarely disappointments, Jonas. I don't think you

need to worry about that," his father reassured him. "And if there

are, you know there's an appeal process." But they all laughed at

that--an appeal went to a committee for study.

"I worry a little about Asher's Assignment," Jonas confessed.

"Asher's such fun. But he doesn't really have any serious interests.

He makes a game out of everything."

His father chuckled. "You know," he said, "I remember when Asher

was a newchild at the Nurturing Center, before he was named. He

never cried. He giggled and laughed at everything. All of us on the

staff enjoyed nurturing Asher."

"The Elders know Asher," his mother said. "They'll find exactly the

right Assignment for him. I don't think you need to worry about him.

But, Jonas, let me warn you about something that may not have

occurred to you. I know I didn't think about it until after my

The Giver Page 22 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Ceremony of Twelve."

"What's that?"

"Well, it's the last of the Ceremonies, as you know. After Twelve,

age isn't important. Most of us even lose track of how old we are as

time passes, though the information is in the Hall of Open Records,

and we could go and look it up if we wanted to. What's important is

the preparation for adult life, and the training you'll receive in your

Assignment."

"I know that," Jonas said. "Everyone knows that."

"But it means," his mother went on, "that you'll move into a new

group. And each of your friends will. You'll no longer be spending

your time with your group of Elevens. After the Ceremony of

Twelve, you'll be with your Assignment

18

group, with those in training. No more volunteer hours. No more

recreation hours. So your friends will no longer be as close."

Jonas shook his head. "Asher and I will always be friends," he said

firmly. "And there will still be school."

"That's true," his father agreed. "But what your mother said is true

as well. There will be changes."

"Good changes, though," his mother pointed out. "After my

Ceremony of Twelve, I missed my childhood recreation. But when I

entered my training for Law and Justice, I found myself with people

who shared my interests. I made friends on a new level, friends of

all ages."

"Did you still play at all, after Twelve?" Jonas asked.

The Giver Page 23 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"Occasionally," his mother replied. "But it didn't seem as important

to me."

"I did," his father said, laughing. "I still do. Every day, at the

Nurturing Center, I play bounce-on-the-knee, and peek-a-boo, and

hug-the-teddy." He reached over and stroked Jonas's neatly

trimmed hair. "Fun doesn't end when you become Twelve."

Lily appeared, wearing her nightclothes, in the doorway. She gave

an impatient sigh. "This is certainly a very long private

conversation," she said. "And there are certain people waiting for

their comfort object."

"Lily," her mother said fondly, "you're very dose to being an Eight,

and when you're an Eight, your comfort object will be taken away. It

will be recycled to the younger children. You should be starting to

go off to sleep without it."

But her father had already gone to the shelf and taken down the

stuffed elephant which was kept there. Many

19

of the comfort objects, like Lily's, were soft, stuffed, imaginary

creatures. Jonas's had been called a bear.

"Here you are, Lily-billy," he said. "I'll come help you remove your

hair ribbons."

Jonas and his mother rolled their eyes, yet they watched

affectionately as Lily and her father headed to her sleeping-room

with the stuffed elephant that had been given to her as her comfort

object when she was born. His mother moved to her big desk and

opened her briefcase; her work never seemed to end, even when

she was at home in the evening. Jonas went to his own desk and

The Giver Page 24 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

began to sort through his school papers for the evening's

assignment. But his mind was still on December and the coming

Ceremony.

Though he had been reassured by the talk with his parents, he

hadn't the slightest idea what Assignment the Elders would be

selecting for his future, or how he might feel about it when the day

came.

20

3

"Oh, look!" Lily squealed in delight. "Isn't he cute? Look how tiny he

is! And he has funny eyes like yours, Jonas!" Jonas glared at her.

He didn't like it that she had mentioned his eyes. He waited for his

father to chastise Lily. But Father was busy unstrapping the

carrying basket from the back of his bicycle. Jonas walked over to

look.

It was the first thing Jonas noticed as he looked at the newchild

peering up curiously from the basket. The pale eyes.

Almost every citizen in the community had dark eyes. His parents

did, and Lily did, and so did all of his group members and friends.

But there were a few exceptions: Jonas himself, and a female Five

who he had noticed had the different, lighter eyes. No one

mentioned such things; it was not a rule, but was considered rude

to call attention to things that were unsettling or different about

individuals. Lily, he decided, would have to learn that soon, or she

would be called in for chastisement because of her insensitive

chatter.

Father put his bike into its port. Then he picked up the basket and

carried it into the house. Lily followed

The Giver Page 25 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

21

behind, but she glanced back over her shoulder at Jonas and

teased, "Maybe he had the same Birthmother as you."

Jonas shrugged. He followed them inside. But he had been startled

by the newchild's eyes. Mirrors were rare in the community; they

weren't forbidden, but there was no real need of them, and Jonas

had simply never bothered to look at himself very often even when

he found himself in a location where a mirror existed. Now, seeing

the newchild and its expression, he was reminded that the light

eyes were not only a rarity but gave the one who had them a

certain look--what was it? Depth, he decided; as if one were looking

into the clear water of the river, down to the bottom, where things

might lurk which hadn't been discovered yet. He felt self-conscious,

realizing that he, too, had that look.

He went to his desk, pretending not to be interested in the

newchild. On the other side of the room, Mother and Lily were

bending over to watch as Father unwrapped its blanket.

"What's his comfort object called?" Lily asked, picking up the

stuffed creature which had been placed beside the newchild in his

basket.

Father glanced at it. "Hippo," he said.

Lily giggled at the strange word. "Hippo," she repeated, and put the

comfort object down again. She peered at the unwrapped newchild,

who waved his arms.

"I think newchildren are so cute," Lily sighed. "I hope I get assigned

to be a Birthmother."

"Lily!" Mother spoke very sharply. "Don't say that. There's very little

The Giver Page 26 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

honor in that Assignment."

"But I was talking to Natasha. You know the Ten who

22

lives around the corner? She does some of her volunteer hours at

the Birthing Center. And she told me that the Birthmothers get

wonderful food, and they have very gentle exercise periods, and

most of the time they just play games and amuse themselves while

they're waiting. 1 think I'd like that," Lily said petulantly.

"Three years," Mother told her firmly. "Three births and that's all.

After that they are Laborers for the rest of their adult lives, until the

day that they enter the House of the Old. Is that what you want,

Lily? Three lazy years, and then hard physical labor until you are

old?"

"Well, no, I guess not," Lily acknowledged reluctantly Father turned

the newchild onto his tummy in the basket. He sat beside it and

rubbed its small back with a rhythmic motion. "Anyway, Lily-billy,"

he said affectionately, "the Birthmothers never even get to see

newchildren. If you enjoy the little ones so much, you should hope

for an Assignment as Nurturer."

"When you're an Eight and start your volunteer hour, you can try

some at the Nurturing Center," Mother suggested.

"Yes, I think I will," Lily said. She knelt beside the basket. "What did

you say his name is? Gabriel? Hello, Gabriel," she said in a

singsong voice. Then she giggled "Ooops," she whispered. "I think

he's alseep. I guess I'd better be quiet."

Jonas turned to the school assignments on his desk Some chance

of that, he thought. Lily was never quiet Probably she should hope

The Giver Page 27 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

for an Assignment as Speaker so that she could sit in the office with

the microphone a1l day, making announcements. He laughed

silently to himself, picturing his sister droning on in the self-
important

23

voice that all the Speakers seemed to develop, saying things like,

ATTENTION. THIS IS A REMINDER TO FEMALES UNDER NINE

THAT HAIR RIBBONS ARE TO BE NEATLY TIED AT ALL TIMES.

He turned toward Lily and noticed to his satisfaction that her

ribbons were, as usual, undone and dangling. There would be an

announcement like that quite soon, he felt certain, and it would be

directed mainly at Lily, though her name, of course, would not be

mentioned. Everyone would know.

Everyone had known, he remembered with humiliation, that the

announcement ATTENTION. THIS IS A REMINDER TO MALE

ELEVENS THAT OBJECTS ARE NOT TO BE REMOVED FROM

THE RECREATION AREA AND THAT SNACKS ARE TO BE

EATEN, NOT HOARDED had been specifically directed at him, the

day last month that he had taken an apple home. No one had

mentioned it, not even his parents, because the public

announcement had been sufficient to produce the appropriate

remorse. He had, of course, disposed of the apple and made his

apology to the Recreation Director the next morning, before school.

Jonas thought again about that incident. He was still bewildered by

it. Not by the announcement or the necessary apology; those were

standard procedures, and he had deserved them--but by the

incident itself. He probably should have brought up his feeling of

bewilderment that very evening when the family unit had shared

their feelings of the day. But he had not been able to sort out and

put words to the source of his confusion, so he had let it pass.

The Giver Page 28 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

It had happened during the recreation period, when he had been

playing with Asher. Jonas had casually picked

24

up an apple from the basket where the snacks were kept, and had

thrown it to his friend. Asher had thrown it back, and they had

begun a simple game of catch.

There had been nothing special about it; it was an activity that he

had performed countless times: throw, catch; throw, catch. It was

effortless for Jonas, and even boring, though Asher enjoyed it, and

playing catch was a required activity for Asher because it would

improve his hand-eye coordination, which was not up to standards.

But suddenly Jonas had noticed, following the path of the apple

through the air with his eyes, that the piece of fruit had--well, this

was the part that he couldn't adequately understand--the apple had

changed. Just for an instant. It had changed in mid-air, he

remembered. Then it was in his hand, and he looked at it carefully,

but it was the same apple. Unchanged. The same size and shape:

a perfect sphere. The same nondescript shade, about the same

shade as his own tunic.

There was absolutely nothing remarkable about that apple. He had

tossed it back and forth between his hands a few times, then

thrown it again to Asher. And again--in the air, for an instant only--it

had changed.

It had happened four times. Jonas had blinked, looked around, and

then tested his eyesight, squinting at the small print on the

identification badge attached to his tunic. He read his name quite

clearly. He could also clearly see Asher at the other end of the

throwing area. And he had had no problem catching the apple.

The Giver Page 29 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas had been completely mystified.

"Ash?" he had called. "Does anything seem strange to you? About

the apple?"

"Yes," Asher called back, laughing. "It jumps out of

25

my hand onto the ground!" Asher had just dropped it once again.

So Jonas laughed too, and with his laughter tried to ignore his

uneasy conviction that something had happened. But he had taken

the apple home, against the recreation area rules. That evening,

before his parents and Lily arrived at the dwelling, he had held it in

his hands and looked at it carefully. It was slightly bruised now,

because Asher had dropped it several times. But there was nothing

at all unusual about the apple.

He had held a magnifying glass to it. He had tossed it several times

across the room, watching, and then rolled it around and around on

his desktop, waiting for the thing to happen again.

But it hadn't. The only thing that happened was the announcement

later that evening over the speaker, the announcement that had

singled him out without using his name, that had caused both of his

parents to glance meaningfully at his desk where the apple still lay.

Now, sitting at his desk, staring at his schoolwork as his family

hovered over the newchild in its basket, he shook his head, trying

to forget the odd incident. He forced himself to arrange his papers

and try to study a little before the evening meal. The newchild,

Gabriel, stirred and whimpered, and Father spoke softly to Lily,

explaining the feeding procedure as he opened the container that

held the formula and equipment.

The Giver Page 30 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

The evening proceeded as all evenings did in the family unit, in the

dwelling, in the community: quiet, reflective, a time for renewal and

preparation for the day to come. It was different only in the addition

to it of the newchild with his pale, solemn, knowing eyes.

26

4

Jonas rode at a leisurely pace, glancing at the bikeports beside the

buildings to see if he could spot Asher's. He didn't often do his

volunteer hours with his friend because Asher frequently fooled

around and made serious work a little difficult. But now, with Twelve

coming so soon and the volunteer hours ending, it didn't seem to

matter.

The freedom to choose where to spend those hours had always

seemed a wonderful luxury to Jonas; other hours of the day were

so carefully regulated.

He remembered when he had become an Eight, as Lily would do

shortly, and had been faced with that freedom of choice. The Eights

always set out on their first volunteer hour a little nervously, giggling

and staying in groups of friends. They almost invariably did their

hours on Recreation Duty first, helping with the younger ones in a

place where they still felt comfortable. But with guidance, as they

developed self-confidence and maturity, they moved on to other

jobs, gravitating toward those that would suit their own interests

and skills.

A male Eleven named Benjamin had done his entire nearly-Four

years in the Rehabilitation Center, working with citizens who had

been injured. It was rumored that he was as skilled now as the

Rehabilitation Directors

The Giver Page 31 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

27

themselves, and that he had even developed some machines and

methods to hasten rehabilitation. There was no doubt that Benjamin

would receive his Assignment to that field and would probably be

permitted to bypass most of the training.

Jonas was impressed by the things Benjamin had achieved. He

knew him, of course, since they had always been groupmates, but

they had never talked about the boy's accomplishments because

such a conversation would have been awkward for Benjamin.

There was never any comfortable way to mention or discuss one's

successes without breaking the rule against bragging, even if one

didn't mean to. It was a minor rule, rather like rudeness, punishable

only by gentle chastisement. But still. Better to steer clear of an

occasion governed by a rule which would be so easy to break.

The area of dwellings behind him, Jonas rode past the community

structures, hoping to spot Asher's bicycle parked beside one of the

small factories or office buildings. He passed the Childcare Center

where Lily stayed after school, and the play areas surrounding it.

He rode through the Central Plaza and the large Auditorium where

public meetings were held.

Jonas slowed and looked at the nametags on the bicycles lined up

outside the Nurturing Center. Then he checked those outside Food

Distribution; it was always fun to help with the deliveries, and he

hoped he would find his friend there so that they could go together

on the daily rounds, carrying the cartons of supplies into the

dwellings of the community. But he finally found Asher's bicycle--

leaning, as usual, instead of upright in its port, as it should have

been--at the House of the Old.

28

The Giver Page 32 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

There was only one other child's bicycle there, that of a female

Eleven named Fiona. Jonas liked Fiona. She was a good student,

quiet and polite, but she had a sense of fun as well, and it didn't

surprise him that she was working with Asher today. He parked his

bicycle neatly in the port beside theirs and entered the building.

"Hello, Jonas," the attendant at the front desk said. She handed him

the sign-up sheet and stamped her own official seal beside his

signature. All of his volunteer hours would be carefully tabulated at

the Hall of Open Records. Once, long ago, it was whispered among

the children, an Eleven had arrived at the Ceremony of Twelve only

to hear a public announcement that he had not completed the

required number of volunteer hours and would not, therefore, be

given his Assignment. He had been permitted an additional month

in which to complete the hours, and then given his Assignment

privately, with no applause, no celebration: a disgrace that had

clouded his entire future.

"It's good to have some volunteers here today," the attendant told

him. "We celebrated a release this morning, and that always throws

the schedule off a little, so things get backed up." She looked at a

printed sheet. "Let's see. Asher and Fiona are helping in the

bathing room. Why don't you join them there? You know where it is,

don't you?"

Jonas nodded, thanked her, and walked down the long hallway. He

glanced into the rooms on either side. The Old were sitting quietly,

some visiting and talking with one another, others doing handwork

and simple crafts. A few were asleep. Each room was comfortably

furnished, the floors covered with thick carpeting. It was a serene

and

29

slow-paced place, unlike the busy centers of manufacture and

The Giver Page 33 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

distribution where the daily work of the community occurred.

Jonas was glad that he had, over the years, chosen to do his hours

in a variety of places so that he could experience the differences.

He realized, though, that not focusing on one area meant he was

left with not the slightest idea-not even a guess of what his

Assignment would be.

He laughed softly. Thinking about the Ceremony again, Jonas? he

teased himself. But he suspected that with the date so near,

probably all of his friends were, too.

He passed a Caretaker walking slowly with one of the Old in the

hall. "Hello, Jonas," the young uniformed man said, smiling

pleasantly. The woman beside him, whose arm he held, was

hunched over as she shuffled along in her soft slippers. She looked

toward Jonas and smiled, but her dark eyes were clouded and

blank. He realized she was blind.

He entered the bathing room with its warm moist air and scent of

cleansing lotions. He removed his tunic, hung it carefully on a wall

hook, and put on the volunteer's smock that was folded on a shelf.

"Hi, Jonas!" Asher called from the corner where he was kneeling

beside a tub. Jonas saw Fiona nearby, at a different tub. She

looked up and smiled at him, but she was busy, gently washing a

man who lay in the warm water.

Jonas greeted them and the caretaking attendants at work nearby.

Then he went to the row of padded lounging chairs where others of

the Old were waiting. He had worked here before; he knew what to

do.

"Your turn, Larissa," he said, reading the nametag on

The Giver Page 34 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

30

the woman's robe. "I'll just start the water and then help you up." He

pressed the button on a nearby empty tub and watched as the

warm water flowed in through the many small openings on the

sides. The tub would be filled in a minute and the water flow would

stop automatically.

He helped the woman from the chair, led her to the tub, removed

her robe, and steadied her with his hand on her arm as she

stepped in and lowered herself. She leaned back and sighed with

pleasure, her head on a soft cushioned headrest.

"Comfortable?" he asked, and she nodded, her eyes closed. Jonas

squeezed cleansing lotion onto the clean sponge at the edge of the

tub and began to wash her frail body.

Last night he had watched as his father bathed the newchild. This

was much the same: the fragile skin, the soothing water, the gentle

motion of his hand, slippery with soap. The relaxed, peaceful smile

on the woman's face reminded him of Gabriel being bathed.

And the nakedness, too. It was against the rules for children or

adults to look at another's nakedness; but the rule did not apply to

newchildren or the Old. Jonas was glad. It was a nuisance to keep

oneself covered while changing for games, and the required

apology if one had by mistake glimpsed another's body was always

awkward. He couldn't see why it was necessary. He liked the

feeling of safety here in this warm and quiet room; he liked the

expression of trust on the woman's face as she lay in the water

unprotected, exposed, and free.

From the corner of his eye he could see his friend Fiona

31

The Giver Page 35 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

help the old man from the tub and tenderly pat his thin, naked body

dry with an absorbant cloth. She helped him into his robe.

Jonas thought Larissa had drifted into sleep, as the Old often did,

and he was careful to keep his motions steady and gentle so he

wouldn't wake her. He was surprised when she spoke, her eyes still

closed.

"This morning we celebrated the release of Roberto," she told him.

"It was wonderful."

"I knew Roberto!" Jonas said. "I helped with his feeding the last

time I was here, just a few weeks ago. He was a very interesting

man."

Larissa opened her eyes happily. "They told his whole life before

they released him," she said. "They always do. But to be honest,"

she whispered with a mischievous look, "some of the tellings are a

little boring. I've even seen some of the Old fall asleep during

tellings- when they released Edna recently. Did you know Edna?"

Jonas shook his head. He couldn't recall anyone named Edna.

"Well, they tried to make her life sound meaningful. And of course,"

she added primly, "all lives are meaningful, I don't mean that they

aren't. But Edna. My goodness. She was a Birthmother, and then

she worked in Food Production for years, until she came here. She

never even had a family unit."

Larissa lifted her head and looked around to make sure no one else

was listening. Then she confided, "I don't think Edna was very

smart."

Jonas laughed. He rinsed her left arm, laid it back into the water,

and began to wash her feet. She murmured

The Giver Page 36 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

32

with pleasure as he massaged her feet with the sponge.

"But Roberto's life was wonderful," Larissa went on, after a

moment. "He had been an Instructor of Elevens --you know how

important that is--and he'd been on the Planning Committee. And--

goodness, I don't know how he found the time--he also raised two

very successful children,, and he was also the one who did the

landscaping design for the Central Plaza. He didn't do the actual

labor, of course."

"Now your back. Lean forward and I'll help you sit up." Jonas put

his arm around her and supported her as she sat. He squeezed the

sponge against her back and began to rub her sharp-boned

shoulders. "Tell me about the celebration."

"Well, there was the telling of his life. That is always first. Then the

toast. We all raised our glasses and cheered. We chanted the

anthem. He made a lovely goodbye speech. And several of us

made little speeches wishing him well. I didn't, though. I've never

been fond of public speaking.

"He was thrilled. You should have seen the look on his face when

they let him go."

Jonas slowed the strokes of his hand on her back thoughtfully.

"Larissa," he asked, "what happens when they make the actual

release? Where exactly did Roberto go?"

She lifted her bare wet shoulders in a small shrug. "I don't know. I

don't think anybody does, except the committee. .He just bowed to

all of us and then walked, like they all do, through the special door

in the Releasing Room. But you should have seen his look. Pure

happiness, I'd call it."

The Giver Page 37 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

33

Jonas grinned. "I wish I'd been there to see it."

Larissa frowned. "I don't know why they don't let children come. Not

enough room, I guess. They should enlarge the Releasing Room."

"We'll have to suggest that to the committee. Maybe they'd study it,"

Jonas said slyly, and Larissa chortled with laughter.

"Right.!" she hooted, and Jonas helped her from the tub.

34

5

Usually, at the morning ritual when the family members told their

dreams, Jonas didn't contribute much. He rarely dreamed.

Sometimes he awoke with a feeling of fragments afloat in his sleep,

but he couldn't seem to grasp them and put them together into

something worthy of telling at the ritual.

But this morning was different. He had dreamed very vividly the

night before.

His mind wandered while Lily, as usual, recounted a lengthy dream,

this one a frightening one in which she had, against the rules, been

riding her mother's bicycle and been caught by the Security

Guards.

They all listened carefully and discussed with Lily the warning that

the dream had given.

"Thank you for your dream, Lily." Jonas said the standard phrase

automatically, and tried to pay better attention while his mother told

The Giver Page 38 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

of a dream fragment, a disquieting scene where she had been

chastised for a rule infraction she didn't understand. Together they

agreed that it probably resulted from her feelings when she had

reluctantly dealt punishment to the citizen who had broken the

major rules a second time.

35

Father said that he had had no dreams.

"Gabe?" Father asked, looking down at the basket where the

newchild lay gurgling after his feeding, ready to be taken back to

the Nurturing Center for the day.

They all laughed. Dream-telling began with Threes. If newchildren

dreamed, no one knew.

"Jonas?" Mother asked. They always asked, though they knew how

rarely Jonas had a dream to tell.

"I did dream last night," Jonas told them. He shifted in his chair,

frowning.

"Good," Father said. "Tell us."

"The details aren't clear, really," Jonas explained, trying to recreate

the odd dream in his mind. "I think I was in the bathing room at the

House of the Old."

"That's where you were yesterday," Father pointed out.

Jonas nodded. "But it wasn't really the same. There was a tub, in

the dream. But only one. And the real bathing room has rows and

rows of them. But the room in the dream was warm and damp. And

I had taken off my tunic, but hadn't put on the smock, so my chest

was bare. I was perspiring, because it was so warm. And Fiona

The Giver Page 39 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

was there, the way she was yesterday."

"Asher, too?" Mother asked.

Jonas shook his head. "No. It was only me and Fiona, alone in the

room, standing beside the tub. She was laughing. But I wasn't. I

was almost a little angry at her, in the dream, because she wasn't

taking me seriously."

"Seriously about what?" Lily asked.

Jonas looked at his plate. For some reason that he didn't

understand, he felt slightly embarrassed. "I think I

36

was trying to convince her that she should get into the tub of water."

He paused. He knew he had to tell it all, that it was not only all right

but necessary to tell all of a dream. So he forced himself to relate

the part that made him uneasy.

"I wanted her to take off her clothes and get into the tub," he

explained quickly. "I wanted to bathe her. I had the sponge in my

hand. But she wouldn't. She kept laughing and saying no."

He looked up at his parents. "That's all," he said.

"Can you describe the strongest feeling in your dream, son?"

Father asked.

Jonas thought about it. The details were murky and vague. But the

feelings were clear, and flooded him again now as he thought. "The

wanting," he said. "I knew that she wouldn't. And I think I knew that

she shouldn't. But I wanted it so terribly. I could feel the wanting all

through me."

The Giver Page 40 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"Thank you for your dream, Jonas," Mother said after a moment.

She glanced at Father.

"Lily," Father said, "it's time to leave for school. Would you walk

beside me this morning and keep an eye on the newchild's basket?

We want to be certain he doesn't wiggle himself loose."

Jonas began to rise to collect his schoolbooks. He thought it

surprising that they hadn't talked about his dream at length before

the thank you. Perhaps they found it as confusing as he had.

"Wait, Jonas," Mother said gently. "I'll write an apology to your

instructor so that you won't have to speak one for being late."

37

He sank back down into his chair, puzzled. He waved to Father and

Lily as they left the dwelling, carrying Gabe in his basket. He

watched while Mother tidied the remains of the morning meal and

placed the tray by the front door for the Collection Crew.

Finally she sat down beside him at the table. "Jonas," she said with

a smile, "the feeling you described as the wanting? It was your first

Stirrings. Father and I have been expecting it to happen to you. It

happens to everyone. It happened to Father when he was your

age. And it happened to me. It will happen someday to Lily.

"And very often," Mother added, "it begins with a dream."

Stirrings. He had heard the word before. He remembered that there

was a reference to the Stirrings in the Book of Rules, though he

didn't remember what it said. And now and then the Speaker

mentioned it. ATTENTION. A REMINDER THAT STIRRINGS

MUST BE REPORTED IN ORDER FOR TREATMENT TO TAKE

PLACE.

The Giver Page 41 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

He had always ignored that announcement because he didn't

understand it and it had never seemed to apply to him in any way.

He ignored, as most citizens did, many of the commands and

reminders read by the Speaker.

"Do I have to report it?" he asked his mother.

She laughed. "You did, in the dream-telling. That's enough."

"But what about the treatment? The Speaker says that treatment

must take place." Jonas felt miserable. Just when the Ceremony

was about to happen, his Ceremony of Twelve, would he have to

go away someplace for treatment? Just because of a stupid

dream?

38

But his mother laughed again in a reassuring, affectionate way.

"No, no," she said. "It's just the pills. You're ready for the pills, that's

all. That's the treatment for Stirrings."

Jonas brightened. He knew about the pills. His parents both took

them each morning. And some of his friends did, he knew. Once he

had been heading off to school with Asher, both of them on their

bikes, when Asher's father had called from their dwelling doorway,

"You forgot your pill, Asher!" Asher had groaned good-naturedly,

turned his bike, and ridden back while Jonas waited.

It was the sort of thing one didn't ask a friend about because it

might have fallen into that uncomfortable category of "being

different." Asher took a pill each morning; Jonas did not. Always

better, less rude, to talk about things that were the same.

Now he swallowed the small pill that his mother handed him.

The Giver Page 42 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"That's all?" he asked.

"That's all," she replied, returning the bottle to the cupboard. "But

you mustn't forget. I'll remind you for the first weeks, but then you

must do it on your own. If you forget, the Stirrings will come back.

The dreams of Stirrings will come back. Sometimes the dosage

must be adjusted."

"Asher takes them," Jonas confided.

His mother nodded, unsurprised. "Many of your groupmates

probably do. The males, at least. And they all will, soon. Females

too."

"How long will I have to take them?"

"Until you enter the House of the Old," she explained.

39

"All of your adult life. But it becomes routine; after a while you won't

even pay much attention to it."

She looked at her watch. "If you leave right now, you won't even be

late for school. Hurry along.

"And thank you again, Jonas," she added, as he went to the door,

"for your dream."

Pedaling rapidly down the path, Jonas felt oddly proud to have

joined those who took the pills. For a moment, though, he

remembered the dream again. The dream had felt pleasurable.

Though the feelings were confused, he thought that he had liked

the feelings that his mother had called Stirrings. He remembered

that upon waking, he had wanted to feel the Stirrings again.

The Giver Page 43 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Then, in the same way that his own dwelling slipped away behind

him as he rounded a corner on his bicycle, the dream slipped away

from his thoughts. Very briefly, a little guiltily, he tried to grasp it

back. But the feelings had disappeared. The Stirrings were gone.

40

6

"Lily, please hold still," Mother said again..

Lily, standing in front of her, fidgeted impatiently. "I can tie them

myself," she complained. "I always have."

"I know that," Mother replied, straightening the hair ribbons on the

little girl's braids. "But I also know that they constantly come loose

and more often than not, they're dangling down your back by

afternoon. Today, at least, we want them to be neatly tied and to

stay neatly tied."

"I don't like hair ribbons. I'm glad I only have to wear them one

more year," Lily said irritably. "Next year I get my bicycle, too," she

added more cheerfully.

"There are good things each year," Jonas reminded her. "This year

you get to start your volunteer hours. And remember last year,

when you became a Seven, you were so happy to get your front-
buttoned jacket?"

The little girl nodded and looked down at herself, at the jacket with

its row of large buttons that designated her as a Seven. Fours,

Fives, and Sixes all wore jackets that fastened down the back so

that they would have to help each other dress and would learn

interdependence.

The Giver Page 44 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

The front-buttoned jacket was the first sign of

41

independence, the first very visible symbol of growing up. The

bicycle, at Nine, would be the powerful emblem of moving gradually

out into the community, away from the protective family unit.

Lily grinned and wriggled away from her mother. "And this year you

get your Assignment," she said to Jonas in an excited voice. "I hope

you get Pilot. And that you take me flying!"

"Sure I will," said Jonas. "And I'll get a special little parachute that

just fits you, and I'll take you up to, oh, maybe twenty thousand feet,

and open the door, and--"

"Jonas," Mother warned.

"I was only joking," Jonas groaned. "I don't want Pilot, anyway. If I

get Pilot I'll put in an appeal."

"Come on," Mother said. She gave Lily's ribbons a final tug.

"Jonas? Are you ready? Did you take your pill? I want to get a good

seat in the Auditorium." She prodded Lily to the front door and

Jonas followed.

It was a short ride to the Auditorium, Lily waving to her friends from

her seat on the back of Mother's bicycle. Jonas stowed his bicycle

beside Mother's and made his way through the throng to find his

group.

The entire community attended the Ceremony each year. For the

parents, it meant two days holiday from work; they sat together in

the huge hall. Children sat with their groups until they went, one by

one, to the stage.

The Giver Page 45 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Father, though, would not join Mother in the audience right away.

For the earliest ceremony, the Naming, the Nurturers brought the

newchildren to the stage. Jonas, from his place in the balcony with

the Elevens, searched the Auditorium for a glimpse of Father. It

wasn't at all

42

hard to spot the Nurturers' section at the front; coming from it were

the wails and howls of the newchildren who sat squirming on the

Nurturers' laps. At every other public ceremony, the audience was

silent and attentive. But once a year, they all smiled indulgently at

the commotion from the little ones waiting to receive their names

and families.

Jonas finally caught his father's eye and waved. Father grinned and

waved back, then held up the hand of the newchild on his lap,

making it wave, too.

It wasn't Gabriel. Gabe was back at the Nurturing Center today,

being cared for by the night crew. He had been given an unusual

and special reprieve from the committee, and granted an additional

year of nurturing before his Naming and Placement. Father had

gone before the committee with a plea on behalf of Gabriel, who

had not yet gained the weight appropriate to his days of life nor

begun to sleep soundly enough at night to be placed with his family

unit. Normally such a newchild would be labeled Inadequate and

released from the community.

Instead, as a result of Father's plea, Gabriel had been labeled

Uncertain and given the additional year. He would continue to be

nurtured at the Center and would spend his nights with Jonas's

family unit. Each family member, including Lily, had been required

to sign a pledge that they would not become attached to this little

temporary guest, and that they would relinquish him without protest

The Giver Page 46 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

or appeal when he was assigned to his own family unit at next

year's Ceremony.

At least, Jonas thought, after Gabriel was placed next year, they

would still see him often because he would be

43

part of the community. If he were released, they would not see him

again. Ever. Those who were released--even as newchildren--were

sent Elsewhere and never returned to the community.

Father had not had to release a single newchild this year, so

Gabriel would have represented a real failure and sadness. Even

Jonas, though he didn't hover over the little one the way Lily and his

father did, was glad that Gabe had not been released.

The first Ceremony began right on time, and Jonas watched as one

after another each newchild was given a name and handed by the

Nurturers to its new family unit. For some, it was a first child. But

many came to the stage accompanied by another child beaming

with pride to receive a little brother or sister, the way Jonas had

when he was about to be a Five.

Asher poked Jonas's arm. "Remember when we got Phillipa?" he

asked in a loud whisper. Jonas nodded. It had only been last year.

Asher's parents had waited quite a long time before applying for a

second child. Maybe, Jonas suspected, they had been so

exhausted by Asher's lively foolishness that they had needed a little

time.

Two of their group, Fiona and another female named Thea, were

missing temporarily, waiting with their parents to receive

newchildren. But it was rare that there was such an age gap

between children in a family unit.

The Giver Page 47 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

When her family's ceremony was completed, Fiona took the seat

that had been saved for her in the row ahead of Asher and Jonas.

She turned and whispered to them, "He's cute. But I don't like his

name very much." She made a face and giggled. Fiona's new

brother had been

44

named Bruno. It wasn't a great name, Jonas thought, like--well, like

Gabriel, for example. But it was okay.

The audience applause, which was enthusiastic at each Naming,

rose in an exuberant swell when one parental pair, glowing with

pride, took a male newchild and heard him named Caleb.

This new Caleb was a replacement child. The couple had lost their

first Caleb, a cheerful little Four. Loss of a child was very, very rare.

The community was extraordinarily safe, each citizen watchful and

protective of all children. But somehow the first little Caleb had

wandered away unnoticed, and had fallen into the river. The entire

community had performed the Ceremony of Loss together,

murmuring the name Caleb throughout an entire day, less and less

frequently, softer in volume, as the long and somber day went on,

so that the little Four seemed to fade away gradually from

everyone's consciousness.

Now, at this special Naming, the community performed the brief

Murmur-of-Replacement Ceremony, repeating the name for the first

time since the loss: softly and slowly at first, then faster and with

greater volume, as the couple stood on the stage with the newchild

sleeping in the mother's arms. It was as if the first Caleb were

returning.

Another newchild was given the name Roberto, and Jonas

remembered that Roberto the Old had been released only last

The Giver Page 48 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

week. But there was no Murmur-of-Replacement Ceremony for the

new little Roberto. Release was not the same as Loss.

He sat politely through the ceremonies of Two and Three and Four,

increasingly bored as he was each year. Then a break for midday

meal--served outdoors--and

45

back again to the seats, for the Fives, Sixes, Sevens, and finally,

last of the first day's ceremonies, the Eights.

Jonas watched and cheered as Lily marched proudly to the stage,

became an Eight and received the identifying jacket that she would

wear this year, this one with smaller buttons and, for the first time,

pockets, indicating that she was mature enough now to keep track

of her own small belongings. She stood solemnly listening to the

speech of firm instructions on the responsibilities of Eight and doing

volunteer hours for the first time. But Jonas could see that Lily,

though she seemed attentive, was looking longingly at the row of

gleaming bicycles, which would be presented tomorrow morning to

the Nines.

Next year, Lily-billy, Jonas thought.

It was an exhausting day, and even Gabriel, retrieved in his basket

from the Nurturing Center, slept soundly that night.

Finally it was the morning of the Ceremony of Twelve.

Now Father sat beside Mother in the audience. Jonas could see

them applauding dutifully as the Nines, one by one, wheeled their

new bicycles, each with its gleaming nametag attached to the back,

from the stage. He knew that his parents cringed a little, as he did,

when Fritz, who lived in the dwelling next door to theirs, received

The Giver Page 49 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

his bike and almost immediately bumped into the podium with it.

Fritz was a very awkward child who had been summoned for

chastisement again and again. His transgressions were small ones,

always: shoes on the wrong feet, schoolwork misplaced, failure to

study adequately for a quiz. But each such error reflected

negatively on his parents' guidance and

46

infringed on the community's sense of order and success. Jonas

and his family had not been looking forward to Fritz's bicycle, which

they realized would probably too often be dropped on the front walk

instead of wheeled neatly into its port.

Finally the Nines were all resettled in their seats, each having

wheeled a bicycle outside where it would be waiting for its owner at

the end of the day. Everyone always chuckled and made small

jokes when the Nines rode home for the first time. "Want me to

show you how to ride?" older friends would call. "I know you've

never been on a bike before!" But invariably the grinning Nines,

who in technical violation of the rule had been practicing secretly for

weeks, would mount and ride off in perfect balance, training wheels

never touching the ground.

Then the Tens. Jonas never found the Ceremony of Ten

particularly interesting- only time-consuming, as each child's hair

was snipped neatly into its distinguishing cut: females lost their

braids at Ten, and males, too, relinquished their long childish hair

and took on the more manly short style which exposed their ears.

Laborers moved quickly to the stage with brooms and swept away

the mounds of discarded hair. Jonas could see the parents of the

new Tens stir and murmur, and he knew that this evening, in many

dwellings, they would be snipping and straightening the hastily

done haircuts, trimming them into a neater line.

The Giver Page 50 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Elevens. It seemed a short time ago that Jonas had undergone the

Ceremony of Eleven, but he remembered that it was not one of the

more interesting ones. By Eleven, one was only waiting to be

Twelve. It was simply a marking of

47

time with no meaningful changes. There was new clothing: different

undergarments for the females, whose bodies were beginning to

change; and longer trousers for the males, with a specially shaped

pocket for the small calculator that they would use this year in

school; but those were simply presented in wrapped packages

without an accompanying speech.

Break for midday meal. Jonas realized he was hungry. He and his

groupmates congregated by the tables in front of the Auditorium

and took their packaged food. Yesterday there had been merriment

at lunch, a lot of teasing and energy. But today the group stood

anxiously, separate from the other children. Jonas watched the new

Nines gravitate toward their waiting bicycles, each one admiring his

or her nametag. He saw the Tens stroking their new shortened hair,

the females shaking their heads to feel the unaccustomed lightness

without the heavy braids they had worn so long.

"I heard about a guy who was absolutely certain he was going to be

assigned Engineer," Asher muttered as they ate, "and instead they

gave him Sanitation Laborer. He went out the next day, jumped into

the river, swam across, and joined the next community he came to.

Nobody ever saw him again."

Jonas laughed. "Somebody made that story up, Ash," he said. "My

father said he heard that story when he was a Twelve."

But Asher wasn't reassured. He was eyeing the river where it was

visible behind the Auditorium. "I can't even swim very well," he said.

The Giver Page 51 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"My swimming instructor said that I don't have the right boyishness

or something."

48

"Buoyancy," Jonas corrected him.

"Whatever. I don't have it. I sink."

"Anyway," Jonas pointed out, "have you ever once known of

anyone--I mean really known for sure, Asher, not just heard a story

about it--who joined another community?"

"No," Asher admitted reluctantly. "But you can. It says so in the

rules. If you don't fit in, you can apply for Elsewhere and be

released. My mother says that once, about ten years ago, someone

applied and was gone the next day." Then he chuckled. "She told

me that because I was driving her crazy. She threatened to apply

for Elsewhere."

"She was joking."

"I know. But it was true, what she said, that someone did that once.

She said that it was really true. Here today and gone tomorrow.

Never seen again. Not even a Ceremony of Release."

Jonas shrugged. It didn't worry him. How could someone not fit in?

The community was so meticulously ordered, the choices so

carefully made.

Even the Matching of Spouses was given such weighty

consideration that sometimes an adult who applied to receive a

spouse waited months or even years before a Match was approved

and announced. All of the factors--disposition, energy level,

intelligence, and interests--had to correspond and to interact

The Giver Page 52 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

perfectly. Jonas's mother, for example, had higher intelligence than

his father; but his father had a calmer disposition. They balanced

each other. Their Match, which like all Matches had been monitored

by the Committee of Elders for three years before they

49

could apply for children, had always been a successful one.

Like the Matching of Spouses and the Naming and Placement of

newchildren, the Assignments were scrupulously thought through

by the Committee of Elders.

He was certain that his Assignment, whatever it was to be, and

Asher's too, would be the right one for them. He only wished that

the midday break would conclude, that the audience would reenter

the Auditorium, and the suspense would end.

As if in answer to his unspoken wish, the signal came and the

crowd began to move toward the doors.

50

7

Now Jonas's group had taken a new place in the Auditorium,

trading with the new Elevens, so that they sat in the very front,

immediately before the stage.

They were arranged by their original numbers, the numbers they

had been given at birth. The numbers were rarely used after the

Naming. But each child knew his number, of course. Sometimes

parents used them in irritation at a child's misbehavior, indicating

that mischief made one unworthy of a name. Jonas always

chuckled when he heard a parent, exasperated, call sharply to a

The Giver Page 53 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

whining toddler, "That's enough, Twenty-three!"

Jonas was Nineteen. He had been the nineteenth newchild born his

year. It had meant that at his Naming, he had been already

standing and bright-eyed, soon to walk and talk. It had given him a

slight advantage the first year or two, a little more maturity than

many of his groupmates who had been born in the later months of

that year. But it evened out, as it always did, by Three.

After Three, the children progressed at much the same level,

though by their first number one could always tell who was a few

months older than others in his group. Technically, Jonas's full

number was Eleven-nineteen,

51

since there were other Nineteens, of course, in each age group.

And today, now that the new Elevens had been advanced this

morning, there were two Eleven-nineteens. At the midday break he

had exchanged smiles with the new one, a shy female named

Harriet.

But the duplication was only for these few hours. Very soon he

would not be an Eleven but a Twelve, and age would no longer

matter. He would be an adult, like his parents, though a new one

and untrained still.

Asher was Four, and sat now in the row ahead of Jonas. He would

receive his Assignment fourth.

Fiona, Eighteen, was on his left; on his other side sat Twenty, a

male named Pierre whom Jonas didn't like much. Pierre was very

serious, not much fun, and a worrier and tattletale, too. "Have you

checked the rules, Jonas?" Pierre was always whispering solemnly.

"I'm not sure that's within the rules." Usually it was some foolish

The Giver Page 54 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

thing that no one cared about--opening his tunic if it was a day with

a breeze; taking a brief try on a friend's bicycle, just to experience

the different feel of it.

The initial speech at the Ceremony of Twelve was made by the

Chief Elder, the leader of the community who was elected every ten

years. The speech was much the same each year: recollection of

the time of childhood and the period of preparation, the coming

responsibilities of adult life, the profound importance of Assignment,

the seriousness of training to come.

Then the Chief Elder moved ahead in her speech. "This is the

time," she began, looking directly at them, "when we acknowledge

differences. You Elevens have spent all your years till now learning

to fit in, to

52

standardize your behavior, to curb any impulse that might set you

apart from the group.

"But today we honor your differences. They have determined your

futures."

She began to describe this year's group and its variety of

personalities, though she singled no one out by name. She

mentioned that there was one who had singular skills at caretaking,

another who loved newchildren, one with unusual scientific

aptitude, and a fourth for whom physical labor was an obvious

pleasure. Jonas shifted in his seat, trying to recognize each

reference as one of his groupmates. The caretaking skills were no

doubt those of Fiona, on his left; he remembered noticing the

tenderness with which she had bathed the Old. Probably the one

with scientific aptitude was Benjamin, the male who had devised

new, important equipment for the Rehabilitation Center. He heard

The Giver Page 55 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

nothing that he recognized as himself, Jonas. Finally the Chief

Elder paid tribute to the hard work of her committee, which had

performed the observations so meticulously all year. The

Committee of Elders stood and was acknowledged by applause.

Jonas noticed Asher yawn slightly, covering his mouth politely with

his hand.

Then, at last, the Chief Elder called number One to the stage, and

the Assignments began.

Each announcement was lengthy, accompanied by a speech

directed at the new Twelve. Jonas tried to pay attention as One,

smiling happily, received her Assignment as Fish Hatchery

Attendant along with words of praise for her childhood spent doing

many volunteer hours there, and her obvious interest in the

important process of providing nourishment for the community.

53

Number One--her name was Madeline--returned, finally, amidst

applause, to her seat, wearing the new badge that designated her

Fish Hatchery Attendant. Jonas was certainly glad that that

Assignment was taken; he wouldn't have wanted it. But he gave

Madeline a smile of congratulation.

When Two, a female named Inger, received her Assignment as

Birthmother, Jonas remembered that his mother had called it a job

without honor. But he thought that the Committee had chosen well.

Inger was a nice girl though somewhat lazy, and her body was

strong. She would enjoy the three years of being pampered that

would follow her brief training; she would give birth easily and well;

and the task of Laborer that would follow would use her strength,

keep her healthy, and impose self-discipline. Inger was smiling

when she resumed her seat. Birthmother was an important job, if

lacking in prestige.

The Giver Page 56 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas noticed that Asher looked nervous. He kept turning his head

and glancing back at Jonas until the group leader had to give him a

silent chastisement, a motion to sit still and face forward.

Three, Isaac, was given an .Assignment as Instructor of Sixes,

which obviously pleased him and was well deserved. Now there

were three Assignments gone, none of them ones that Jonas would

have liked not that he could have been a Birthmother, anyway, he

realized with amusement. He tried to sort through the list in his

mind, the possible Assignments that remained. But there were so

many he gave it up; and anyway, now it was Asher's turn. He paid

strict attention as his friend went to the stage and stood self-
consciously beside the Chief Elder.

54

"All of us in the community know and enjoy Asher," the Chief Elder

began. Asher grinned and scratched one leg with the other foot.

The audience chuckled softly.

"When the committee began to consider Asher's Assignment," she

went on, "there were some possibilities that were immediately

discarded. Some that would clearly not have been right for Asher.

"For example," she said, smiling, "we did not consider for an instant

designating Asher an Instructor of Threes."

The audience howled with laughter. Asher laughed, too, looking

sheepish but pleased at the special attention. The Instructors of

Threes were in charge of the acquisition of correct language.

"In fact," the Chief Elder continued, chuckling a little herself, "we

even gave a little thought to some retroactive chastisement for the

one who had been Asher's Instructor of Threes so long ago. At the

meeting where Asher was discussed, we retold many of the stories

The Giver Page 57 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

that we all remembered from his days of language acquisition.

"Especially," she said, chuckling, "the difference between snack

and smack. Remember, Asher?"

Asher nodded ruefully, and the audience laughed aloud. Jonas did,

too. He remembered, though he had been only a Three at the time

himself.

The punishment used for small children was a regulated system of

smacks with the discipline wand: a thin, flexible weapon that stung

painfully when it was wielded. The Childcare specialists were

trained very carefully in the discipline methods: a quick smack

across the hands for a bit of minor misbehavior; three sharper

smacks on the bare legs for a second offense.

55

Poor Asher, who always talked too fast and mixed up words, even

as a toddler. As a Three, eager for his juice and crackers at

snacktime, he one day said "smack" instead of "snack" as he stood

waiting in line for the morning treat.

Jonas remembered it clearly. He could still see little Asher, wiggling

with impatience in the line. He remembered the cheerful voice call

out, "I want my smack!"

The other Threes, including Jonas, had laughed nervously.

"Snack!" they corrected. "You meant snack, Asher!" But the mistake

had been made. And precision of language was one of the most

important tasks of small children. Asher had asked for a smack.

The discipline wand, in the hand of the Childcare worker, whistled

as it came down across Asher's hands. Asher whimpered, cringed,

and corrected himself instantly. "Snack," he whispered.

The Giver Page 58 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

But the next morning he had done it again. And again the following

week. He couldn't seem to stop, though for each lapse the

discipline wand came again, escalating to a series of painful lashes

that left marks on Asher's legs. Eventually, for a period of time,

Asher stopped talking altogether, when he was a Three.

"For a while," the Chief Elder said, relating the story, "we had a

silent Asher! But he learned."

She turned to him with a smile. "When he began to talk again, it

was with greater precision. And now his lapses are very few. His

corrections and apologies are very prompt. And his good humor is

unfailing." The audience murmured in agreement. Asher's cheerful

disposition was well-known throughout the community.

56

"Asher." She lifted her voice to make the official announcement.

"We have given you the Assignment of Assistant Director of

Recreation."

She clipped on his new badge as he stood beside her, beaming.

Then he turned and left the stage as the audience cheered. When

he had taken his seat again, the Chief Elder looked down at him

and said the words that she had said now four times, and would

say to each new Twelve. Somehow she gave it special meaning for

each of them.

"Asher," she said, "thank you for your childhood."

The Assignments continued, and Jonas watched and listened,

relieved now by the wonderful Assignment his best friend had been

given. But he was more and more apprehensive as his own

approached. Now the new Twelves in the row ahead had all

received their badges. They were fingering them as they sat, and

The Giver Page 59 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas knew that each one was thinking about the training that lay

ahead. For some--one studious male had been selected as Doctor,

a female as Engineer, and another for Law and Justice--it would be

years of hard work and study. Others, like Laborers and

Birthmothers, would have a much shorter training period.

Eighteen, Fiona, on his left, was ca]led. Jonas knew she must be

nervous, but Fiona was a calm female. She had been sitting quietly,

serenely, throughout the Ceremony.

Even the applause, though enthusiastic, seemed serene when

Fiona was given the important Assignment of Caretaker of the Old.

It was perfect for such a sensitive, gentle girl, and her smile was

satisfied and pleased when she took her seat beside him again.

57

Jonas prepared himself to walk to the stage when the applause

ended and the Chief Elder picked up the next folder and looked

down to the group to call forward the next new Twelve. He was

calm now that his turn had come. He took a deep breath and

smoothed his hair with his hand.

"Twenty," he heard her voice say clearly. "Pierre."

She skipped me, Jonas thought, stunned. Had he heard wrong?

No. There was a sudden hush in the crowd, and he knew that the

entire community realized that the Chief Elder had moved from

Eighteen to Twenty, leaving a gap. On his right, Pierre, with a

startled look, rose from his seat and moved to the stage.

A mistake. She made a mistake. But Jonas knew, even as he had

the thought, that she hadn't. The Chief Elder made no mistakes.

Not at the Ceremony of Twelve.

The Giver Page 60 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

He felt dizzy, and couldn't focus his attention. He didn't hear what

Assignment Pierre received, and was only dimly aware of the

applause as the boy returned, wearing his new badge. Then:

Twenty-one. Twenty-two.

The numbers continued in order. Jonas sat, dazed, as they moved

into the Thirties and then the Forties, nearing the end. Each time, at

each announcement, his heart jumped for a moment, and he

thought wild thoughts. Perhaps now she would call his name. Could

he have forgotten his own number? No. He had always been

Nineteen. He was sitting in the seat marked Nineteen.

But she had skipped him. He saw the others in his group glance at

him, embarrassed, and then avert their eyes quickly. He saw a

worried look on the face of his group leader.

58

He hunched his shoulders and tried to make himself smaller in the

seat. He wanted to disappear, to fade away, not to exist. He didn't

dare to turn and find his parents in the crowd. He couldn't bear to

see their faces darkened with shame.

Jonas bowed his head and searched through his mind. What had

he done wrong?

59

8

The audience was clearly ill at ease. They applauded at the final

Assignment; but the applause was piecemeal, no longer a

crescendo of united enthusiasm. There were murmurs of confusion.

Jonas moved his hands together, clapping, but it was an automatic,

The Giver Page 61 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

meaningless gesture that he wasn't even aware of. His mind had

shut out all of the earlier emotions: the anticipation, excitement,

pride, and even the happy kinship with his friends. Now he felt only

humiliation and terror.

The Chief Elder waited until the uneasy applause subsided. Then

she spoke again.

"I know," she said in her vibrant, gracious voice, "that you are all

concerned. That you feel I have made a mistake."

She smiled. The community, relieved from its discomfort very

slightly by her benign statement, seemed to breathe more easily. It

was very silent.

Jonas looked up.

"I have caused you anxiety," she said. "I apologize to my

community." Her voice flowed over the assembled crowd.

60

"We accept your apology," they all uttered together.

"Jonas," she said, looking down at him, "I apologize to you in

particular. I caused you anguish."

"I accept your apology," Jonas replied shakily.

"Please come to the stage now."

Earlier that day, dressing in his own dwelling, he had practiced the

kind of jaunty, self-assured walk that he hoped he could make to

the stage when his turn came. All of that was forgotten now. He

simply willed himself to stand, to move his feet that felt weighted

and clumsy, to go forward, up the steps and across the platform

The Giver Page 62 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

until he stood at her side.

Reassuringly she placed her arm across his tense shoulders.

"Jonas has not been assigned," she informed the crowd, and his

heart sank.

Then she went on. "Jonas has been selected."

He blinked. What did that mean? He felt a collective, questioning

stir from the audience. They, too, were puzzled.

In a firm, commanding voice she announced, "Jonas has been

selected to be our next Receiver of Memory."

Then he heard the gasp--the sudden intake of breath, drawn

sharply in astonishment, by each of the seated citizens. He saw

their faces; the eyes widened in awe.

And still he did not understand.

"Such a selection is very, very rare," the Chief Elder told the

audience. "Our community has only one Receiver. It is he who

trains his successor.

"We have had our current Receiver for a very long time," she went

on. Jonas followed her eyes and saw that

61

she was looking at one of the Elders. The Committee of Elders was

sitting together in a group; and the Chief Elder's eyes were now on

one who sat in the midst but seemed oddly separate from them. It

was a man Jonas had never noticed before, a bearded man with

pale eyes. He was watching Jonas intently.

The Giver Page 63 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"We failed in our last selection," the Chief Elder said solemnly. "It

was ten years ago, when Jonas was just a toddler. I will not dwell

on the experience because it causes us all terrible discomfort."

Jonas didn't know what she was referring to, but he could sense the

discomfort of the audience. They shifted uneasily in their seats.

"We have not been hasty this time," she continued. "We could not

afford another failure."

"Sometimes," she went on, speaking now in a lighter tone, relaxing

the tension in the Auditorium, "we are not entirely certain about the

Assignments, even after the most painstaking observations.

Sometimes we worry that the one assigned might not develop,

through training, every attribute necessary. Elevens are still

children, after all. What we observe as playfulness and patience--

the requirements to become Nurturer--could, with maturity, be

revealed as simply foolishness and indolence. So we continue to

observe during training, and to modify behavior when necessary.

"But the Receiver-in-training cannot be observed, cannot be

modified. That is stated quite clearly in the rules. He is to be alone,

apart, while he is prepared by the current Receiver for the job which

is the most honored in our community."

62

Alone? Apart? Jonas listened with increasing unease. "Therefore

the selection must be sound. It must be a unanimous choice of the

Committee. They can have no doubts, however fleeting. If, during

the process, an Elder reports a dream of uncertainty, that dream

has the power to set a candidate aside instantly.

"Jonas was identified as a possible Receiver many years ago. We

have observed him meticulously. There were no dreams of

The Giver Page 64 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

uncertainty.

"He has shown all of the qualities that a Receiver must have."

With her hand still firmly on his shoulder, the Chief Elder listed the

qualities.

"Intelligence," she said. "We are all aware that Jonas has been a

top student throughout his school days.

"Integrity," she said next. "Jonas has, like all of us, committed minor

transgressions." She smiled at him. "We expect that. We hoped,

also, that he would present himself promptly for chastisement, and

he has always done so.

" Courage ," she went on. "Only one of us here today has ever

undergone the rigorous training required of a Receiver. He, of

course, is the most important member of the Committee: the current

Receiver. It was he who reminded us, again and again, of the

courage required.

"Jonas," she said, turning to him, but speaking in a voice that the

entire community could hear, "the training required of you involves

pain. Physical pain."

He felt fear flutter within him.

"You have never experienced that. Yes, you have scraped your

knees in falls from your bicycle. Yes, you crushed your finger in a

door last year."

63

Jonas nodded, agreeing, as he recalled the incident, and its

accompanying misery.

The Giver Page 65 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"But you will be faced, now," she explained gently, "with pain of a

magnitude that none of us here can comprehend because it is

beyond our experience. The Receiver himself was not able to

describe it, only to remind us that you would be faced with it, that

you would need immense courage. We cannot prepare you for that.

"But we feel certain that you are brave," she said to him.

He did not feel brave at all. Not now.

"The fourth essential attribute," the Chief Elder said, "is wisdom.

Jonas has not yet acquired that. The acquisition of wisdom will

come through his training.

"We are convinced that Jonas has the ability to acquire wisdom.

That is what we looked for.

"Finally, The Receiver must have one more quality, and it is one

which I can only name, but not describe. I do not understand it. You

members of the community will not understand it, either. Perhaps

Jonas will, because the current Receiver has told us that Jonas

already has this quality. He calls it the Capacity to See Beyond."

The Chief Elder looked at Jonas with a question in her eyes. The

audience watched him, too. They were silent.

For a moment he froze, consumed with despair. He didn't have it,

the whatever-she-had-said. He didn't know what it was. Now was

the moment when he would have to confess, to say, "No, I don't. I

can't," and throw himself on their mercy, ask their forgiveness, to

explain that he had been wrongly chosen, that he was not the right

one at all.

64

The Giver Page 66 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

But when he looked out across the crowd, the sea of faces, the

thing happened again. The thing that had happened with the apple.

They changed.

He blinked, and it was gone. His shoulders straightened slightly.

Briefly he felt a tiny sliver of sureness for the first time.

She was still watching him. They all were.

"I think it's true," he told the Chief Elder and the community. "I don't

understand it yet. I don't know what it is. But sometimes I see

something. And maybe it's beyond."

She took her arm from his shoulders.

"Jonas," she said, speaking not to him alone but to the entire

community of which he was a part, "you will be trained to be our

next Receiver of Memory. We thank you for your childhood."

Then she turned and left the stage, left him there alone, standing

and facing the crowd, which began spontaneously the collective

murmur of his name.

"Jonas." It was a whisper at first: hushed, barely audible. "Jonas.

Jonas."

Then louder, faster. "JONAS. JONAS. JONAS." With the chant,

Jonas knew, the community was accepting him and his new role,

giving him life, the way they had given it to the newchild Caleb. His

heart swelled with gratitude and pride.

But at the same time he was filled with fear. He did not know what

his selection meant. He did not know what he was to become.

Or what would become of him.

The Giver Page 67 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

65

9

Now, for the first time in his twelve years of life, Jonas felt separate,

different. He remembered what the Chief Elder had said: that his

training would be alone and apart.

But his training had not yet begun and already, upon leaving the

Auditorium, he felt the apartness. Holding the folder she had given

him, he made his way through the throng, looking for his family unit

and for Asher. People moved aside for him. They watched him. He

thought he could hear whispers.

"Ash!" he called, spotting his friend near the rows of bicycles. "Ride

back with me?"

"Sure." Asher smiled, his usual smile, friendly and familiar. But

Jonas felt a moment of hesitation from his friend, an uncertainty.

"Congratulations," Asher said.

"You too," Jonas replied. "It was really funny, when she told about

the smacks. You got more applause than almost anybody else."

The other new Twelves clustered nearby, placing their folders

carefully into the carrying containers on the backs of the bikes. In

each dwelling tonight they would be

66

studying the instructions for the beginning of their training. Each

night for years the children had memorized the required lessons for

school, often yawning with boredom. Tonight they would all begin

eagerly to memorize the rules for their adult Assignments.

The Giver Page 68 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"Congratulations, Asher!" someone called. Then that hesitation

again. "You too, Jonas!"

Asher and Jonas responded with congratulations to their

groupmates. Jonas saw his parents watching him from the place

where their own bicycles were waiting. Lily had already been

strapped into her seat.

He waved. They waved back, smiling, but he noticed that Lily was

watching him solemnly, her thumb in her mouth.

He rode directly to his dwelling, exchanging only small jokes and

unimportant remarks with Asher.

"See you in the morning, Recreation Director!" he called,

dismounting by his door as Asher continued on.

"Right! See you!" Asher called back. Once again, there was just a

moment when things weren't quite the same, weren't quite as they

had always been through the long friendship. Perhaps he had

imagined it. Things couldn't change, with Asher.

The evening meal was quieter than usual. Lily chattered about her

plans for volunteer work; she would begin, she said, at the

Nurturing Center, since she was already an expert at feeding

Gabriel.

"I know," she added quickly, when her father gave her a warning

glance, "I won't mention his name. I know I'm not supposed to know

his name.

"I can't wait for tomorrow to come," she said happily.

Jonas sighed uneasily. "I can," he muttered.

The Giver Page 69 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

67

"You've been greatly honored," his mother said. "Your father and I

are very proud."

"It's the most important job in the community," Father said.

"But just the other night, you said that the job of making

Assignments was the most important!"

Mother nodded. "This is different. It's not a job, really. I never

thought, never expected--" She paused. "There's only one

Receiver."

"But the Chief Elder said that they had made a selection before,

and that it failed. What was she talking about?"

Both of his parents hesitated. Finally his father described the

previous selection. "It was very much as it was today, Jonas- the

same suspense, as one Eleven had been passed over when the

Assignments were given. Then the announcement, when they

singled out the one--"

Jonas interrupted. "What was his name?"

His mother replied, "Her, not his. It was a female. But we are never

to speak the name, or to use it again for a newchild."

Jonas was shocked. A name designated Not-to-Be-Spoken

indicated the highest degree of disgrace.

"What happened to her?" he asked nervously.

But his parents looked blank. "We don't know," his father said

uncomfortably. "We never saw her again."

The Giver Page 70 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

A silence fell over the room. They looked at each other. Finally his

mother, rising from the table, said, "You've been greatly honored,

Jonas. Greatly honored."

Alone in his sleepingroom, prepared for bed, Jonas opened his

folder at last. Some of the other Twelves, he had

68

noticed, had been given folders thick with printed pages. He

imagined Benjamin, the scientific male in his group, beginning to

read pages of rules and instructions with relish. He pictured Fiona

smiling her gentle smile as she bent over the lists of duties and

methods that she would be required to learn in the days to come.

But his own folder was startlingly close to empty. Inside there was

only a single printed sheet. He read it twice.

JONAS

RECEIVER OF MEMORY

1. Go immediately at the end of school hours each day to the

Annex entrance behind the House of the Old and present yourself

to the attendant.

2. Go immediately to your dwelling at the conclusion of Training

Hours each day.

3. From this moment you are exempted from rules governing

rudeness. You may ask any question of any citizen and you will

receive answers.

4. Do not discuss your training with any other member of the

community, including parents and Elders.

The Giver Page 71 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

5. From this moment you are prohibited from dream-telling.

6. Except for illness or injury unrelated to your training, do not apply

for any medication.

7. You are not permitted to apply for release.

8. You may lie.

69

Jonas was stunned. What would happen to his friendships? His

mindless hours playing ball, or riding his bike along the river?

Those had been happy and vital times for him. Were they to be

completely taken from him, now? The simple logistic instructions--

where to go, and when--were expected. Every Twelve had to be

told, of course, where and how and when to report for training. But

he was a little dismayed that his schedule left no time, apparently,

for recreation.

The exemption from rudeness startled him. Reading it again,

however, he realized that it didn't compel him to be rude; it simply

allowed him the option. He was quite certain he would never take

advantage of it. He was so completely, so thoroughly accustomed

to courtesy within the community that the thought of asking another

citizen an intimate question, of calling someone's attention to an

area of awkwardness, was unnerving.

The prohibition of dream-telling, he thought, would not be a real

problem. He dreamed so rarely that the dream-telling did not come

easily to him anyway, and he was glad to be excused from it. He

wondered briefly, though, how to deal with it at the morning meal.

What if he did dream--should he simply tell his family unit, as he did

so often, anyway, that he hadn't? That would be a lie. Still, the final

rule said ... well, he wasn't quite ready to think about the final rule

The Giver Page 72 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

on the page.

The restriction of medication unnerved him. Medication was always

available to citizens, even to children, through their parents. When

he had crushed his finger in the door, he had quickly, gasping into

the speaker, notified his mother; she had hastily requisitioned relief-
of-pain

70

medication which had promptly been delivered to his dwelling.

Almost instantly the excruciating pain in his hand had diminished to

the throb which was, now, all he could recall of the experience.

Re-reading rule number 6, he realized that a crushed finger fell into

the category of "unrelated to training." So if it ever happened again-

-and he was quite certain it wouldn't; he had been very careful near

heavy doors since the accident!--he could still receive medication.

The pill he took now, each morning, was also unrelated to training.

So he would continue to receive the pill.

But he remembered uneasily what the Chief Elder had said about

the pain that would come with his training. She had called it

indescribable.

Jonas swallowed hard, trying without success to imagine what such

pain might be like, with no medication at all. But it was beyond his

comprehension.

He felt no reaction to rule number 7 at all. It had never occurred to

him that under any circumstances, ever, he might apply for release.

Finally he steeled himself to read the final rule again. He had been

trained since earliest childhood, since his earliest learning of

The Giver Page 73 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

language, never to lie. It was an integral part of the learning of

precise speech. Once, when he had been a Four, he had said, just

prior to the midday meal at school, "I'm starving."

Immediately he had been taken aside for a brief private lesson in

language precision. He was not starving, it was pointed out. He was

hungry. No one in the community was starving, had ever been

starving, would ever be starving. To say "starving" was to speak a

lie. An unintentioned

71

lie, of course. But the reason for precision of language was to

ensure that unintentional lies were never uttered. Did he

understand that? they asked him. And he had.

He had never, within his memory, been tempted to lie. Asher did

not lie. Lily did not lie. His parents did not lie. No one did. Unless ...

Now Jonas had a thought that he had never had before. This new

thought was frightening. What if others--adult-- had, upon becoming

Twelves, received in their instructions the same terrifying

sentence?

What if they had all been instructed: You may lie?

His mind reeled. Now, empowered to ask questions of utmost

rudeness and promised answers--he could, conceivably (though it

was almost unimaginable), ask someone, some adult, his father

perhaps: "Do you lie?"

But he would have no way of knowing if the answer he received

were true.

72

The Giver Page 74 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

10

"I go in here, Jonas," Fiona told him when they reached the front

door of the House of the Old after parking their bicycles in the

designated area.

"I don't know why I'm nervous," she confessed. "I've been here so

often before." She turned her folder over in her hands.

"Well, everything's different now," Jonas reminded her.

"Even the nameplates on our bikes," Fiona laughed. During the

night the nameplate of each new Twelve had been removed by the

Maintenance Crew and replaced with the style that indicated

citizen-in-training.

"I don't want to be late," she said hastily, and started up the steps.

"If we finish at the same time, I'll ride home with you."

Jonas nodded, waved to her, and headed around the building

toward the Annex, a small wing attached to the back. He certainly

didn't want to be late for his first day of training, either.

The Annex was very ordinary, its door unremarkable. He reached

for the heavy handle, then noticed a buzzer on the wall. So he

buzzed instead.

73

"Yes?" The voice came through a small speaker above the buzzer.

"It's, uh, Jonas. I'm the new--I mean--"

"Come in." A click indicated that the door had been unlatched.

The lobby was very small and contained only a desk at which a

The Giver Page 75 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

female Attendant sat working on some papers. She looked up when

he entered; then, to his surprise, she stood. It was a small thing, the

standing; but no one had ever stood automatically to acknowledge

Jonas's presence before.

"Welcome, Receiver of Memory," she said respectfully.

"Oh, please," he replied uncomfortably. "Call me Jonas."

She smiled, pushed a button, and he heard a click that unlocked

the door to her left. "You may go right on in," she told him.

Then she seemed to notice his discomfort and to realize its origin.

No doors in the community were locked, ever. None that Jonas

knew of, anyway.

"The locks are simply to insure The Receiver's privacy because he

needs concentration," she explained. "It would be difficult if citizens

wandered in, looking for the Department of Bicycle Repair, or

something."

Jonas laughed, relaxing a little. The woman seemed very friendly,

and it was true--in fact it was a joke throughout the community--that

the Department of Bicycle Repair, an unimportant little office, was

relocated so often that no one ever knew where it was.

"There is nothing dangerous here," she told him.

"But," she added, glancing at the wall clock, "he doesn't like to be

kept waiting."

74

Jonas hurried through the door and found himself in a comfortably

furnished living area. It was not unlike his own family unit's dwelling.

Furniture was standard throughout the community: practical, sturdy,

The Giver Page 76 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

the function of each piece clearly defined. A bed for sleeping. A

table for eating. A desk for studying.

All of those things were in this spacious room, though each was

slightly different from those in his own dwelling. The fabrics on the

upholstered chairs and sofa were slightly thicker and more

luxurious; the table legs were not straight like those at home, but

slender and curved, with a small carved decoration at the foot. The

bed, in an alcove at the far end of the room, was draped with a

splendid cloth embroidered over its entire surface with intricate

designs.

But the most conspicuous difference was the books. In his own

dwelling, there were the necessary reference volumes that each

household contained: a dictionary, and the thick community volume

which contained descriptions of every office, factory, building, and

committee. And the Book of Rules, of course.

The books in his own dwelling were the only books that Jonas had

ever seen. He had never known that other books existed.

But this room's walls were completely covered by bookcases, filled,

which reached to the ceiling. There must have been hundreds--

perhaps thousands--of books, their titles embossed in shiny letters.

Jonas stared at them. He couldn't imagine what the thousands of

pages contained. Could there be rules beyond the rules that

governed the community? Could there be

75

more descriptions of offices and factories and committees?

He had only a second to look around because he was aware that

the man sitting in a chair beside the table was watching him. Hastily

The Giver Page 77 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

he moved forward, stood before the man, bowed slightly, and said,

"I'm Jonas."

"I know. Welcome, Receiver of Memory."

Jonas recognized the man. He was the Elder who had seemed

separate from the others at the Ceremony, though he was dressed

in the same special clothing that only Elders wore.

Jonas looked self-consciously into the pale eyes that mirrored his

own.

"Sir, I apologize for my lack of understanding..... "

He waited, but the man did not give the standard accepting-of-
apology response.

After a moment, Jonas went on, "But I thought--I mean I think," he

corrected, reminding himself that if precision of language were ever

to be important, it was certainly important now, in the presence of

this man, "that you are the Receiver of Memory. I'm only, well, I was

only assigned, I mean selected, yesterday. I'm not anything at all.

Not yet."

The man looked at him thoughtfully, silently. It was a look that

combined interest, curiosity, concern, and perhaps a little sympathy

as well.

Finally he spoke. "Beginning today, this moment, at least to me,

you are the Receiver.

"I have been the Receiver for a long time. A very, very long time.

You can see that, can't you?"

Jonas nodded. The man was wrinkled, and his eyes, though

piercing in their unusual lightness, seemed tired.

The Giver Page 78 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

76

The flesh around them was darkened into shadowed circles.

"I can see that you are very old," Jonas responded with respect.

The Old were always given the highest respect.

The man smiled. He touched the sagging flesh on his own face with

amusement. "I am not, actually, as old as I look," he told Jonas.

"This job has aged me. I know I look as if I should be scheduled for

release very soon. But actually I have a good deal of time left.

"I was pleased, though, when you were selected. It took them a

long time. The failure of the previous selection was ten years ago,

and my energy is starting to diminish. I need what strength I have

remaining for your training. We have hard and painful work to do,

you and I.

"Please sit down," he said, and gestured toward the nearby chair.

Jonas lowered himself onto the soft cushioned seat.

The man dosed his eyes and continued speaking. "When I became

a Twelve, I was selected, as you were. I was frightened, as I'm sure

you are." He opened his eyes for a moment and peered at Jonas,

who nodded.

The eyes closed again. "I came to this very room to begin my

training. It was such a long time ago.

"The previous Receiver seemed just as old to me as I do to you. He

was just as tired as I am today."

He sat forward suddenly, opened his eyes, and said, "You may ask

questions. I have so little experience in describing this process. It is

forbidden to talk of it."

The Giver Page 79 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"I know, sir. I have read the instructions," Jonas said.

"So I may neglect to make things as clear as I should." The man

chuckled. "My job is important and has enormous honor. But that

does not mean I am perfect, and

77

when I tried before to train a successor, I failed. Please ask any

questions that will help you."

In his mind, Jonas had questions. A thousand. A million questions.

As many questions as there were books lining the walls. But he did

not ask one, not yet.

The man sighed, seeming to put his thoughts in order. Then he

spoke again. "Simply stated," he said, "although it's not really

simple at all, my job is to transmit to you all the memories I have

within me. Memories of the past."

"Sir," Jonas said tentatively, "I would be very interested to hear the

story of your life, and to listen to your memories.

"I apologize for interrupting," he added quickly.

The man waved his hand impatiently. "No apologies in this room.

We haven't time."

"Well," Jonas went on, uncomfortably aware that he might be

interrupting again, "I am really interested, I don't mean that I'm not.

But I don't exactly understand why it's so important. I could do

some adult job in the community, and in my recreation time I could

come and listen to the stories from your childhood. I'd like that.

Actually," he added, "I've done that already, in the House of the

Old. The Old like to tell about their childhoods, and it's always fun to

The Giver Page 80 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

listen."

The man shook his head. "No, no," he said. "I'm not being clear. It's

not my past, not my childhood that I must transmit to you."

He leaned back, resting his head against the back of the

upholstered chair. "It's the memories of the whole world," he said

with a sigh. "Before you, before me, before the previous Receiver,

and generations before him."

Jonas frowned. "The whole world?" he asked. "I don't

78

understand. Do you mean not just us? Not just the community? Do

you mean Elsewhere, too?" He tried, in his mind, to grasp the

concept. "I'm sorry, sir. I don't understand exactly. Maybe I'm not

smart enough. I don't know what you mean when you say 'the

whole world' or 'generations before him.' I thought there was only

us. I thought there was only now."

"There's much more. There's all that goes beyond--all that is

Elsewhere--and all that goes back, and back, and back. I received

all of those, when I was selected. And here in this room, all alone, I

re-experience them again and again. It is how wisdom comes. And

how we shape our future."

He rested for a moment, breathing deeply. "I am so weighted with

them," he said.

Jonas felt a terrible concern for the man, suddenly.

"It's as if ... " The man paused, seeming to search his mind for the

right words of description. "It's like going downhill through deep

snow on a sled," he said, finally. "At first it's exhilarating: the speed;

The Giver Page 81 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

the sharp, clear air; but then the snow accumulates, builds up on

the runners, and you slow, you have to push hard to keep going,

and--"

He shook his head suddenly, and peered at Jonas. "That meant

nothing to you, did it?" he asked.

Jonas was confused. "I didn't understand it, sir."

"Of course you didn't. You don't know what snow is, do you?"

Jonas shook his head.

"Or a sled? Runners?"

"No, sir," Jonas said.

79

"Downhill? The term means nothing to you?"

"Nothing, sir."

"Well, it's a place to start. I'd been wondering how to begin. Move to

the bed, and lie face down. Remove your tunic first."

Jonas did so, a little apprehensively. Beneath his bare chest, he felt

the soft folds of the magnificent cloth that covered the bed. He

watched as the man rose and moved first to the wall where the

speaker was. It was the same sort of speaker that occupied a place

in every dwelling, but one thing about it was different. This one had

a switch, which the man deftly snapped to the end that said OFF.

Jonas almost gasped aloud. To have the power to turn the speaker

off! It was an astonishing thing.

The Giver Page 82 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Then the man moved with surprising quickness to the corner where

the bed was. He sat on a chair beside Jonas, who was motionless,

waiting for what would happen next.

"Close your eyes. Relax. This will not be painful."

Jonas remembered that he was allowed, that he had even been

encouraged, to ask questions. "What are you going to do, sir?" he

asked, hoping that his voice didn't betray his nervousness.

"I am going to transmit the memory of snow," the old man said, and

placed his hands on Jonas's bare back.

80

11

Jonas felt nothing unusual at first. He felt only the light touch of the

old man's hands on his back.

He tried to relax, to breathe evenly. The room was absolutely silent,

and for a moment Jonas feared that he might disgrace himself now,

on the first day of his training, by falling asleep.

Then he shivered. He realized that the touch of the hands felt,

suddenly, cold. At the same instant, breathing in, he felt the air

change, and his very breath was cold. He licked his lips, and in

doing so, his tongue touched the suddenly chilled air.

It was very startling; but he was not at all frightened, now. He was

filled with energy, and he breathed again, feeling the sharp intake

of frigid air. Now, too, he could feel cold air swirling around his

entire body. He felt it blow against his hands where they lay at his

sides, and over his back.

The Giver Page 83 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

The touch of the man's hands seemed to have disappeared.

Now he became aware of an entirely new sensation: pinpricks? No,

because they were soft and without pain. Tiny, cold, featherlike

feelings peppered his body and face. He put out his tongue again,

and caught one of the

81

dots of cold upon it. It disappeared from his awareness instantly;

but he caught another, and another. The sensation made him

smile.

One part of his consciousness knew that he was still lying there, on

the bed, in the Annex room. Yet another, separate part of his being

was upright now, in a sitting position, and beneath him he could feel

that he was not on the soft decorated bedcovering at all, but rather

seated on a flat, hard surface. His hands now held (though at the

same time they were still motionless at his sides) a rough, damp

rope.

And he could see, though his eyes were closed. He could see a

bright, whirling torrent of crystals in the air around him, and he

could see them gather on the backs of his hands, like cold fur.

His breath was visible.

Beyond, through the swirl of what he now, somehow, perceived

was the thing the old man had spoken of-- snow-- he could look out

and down a great distance. He was up high someplace. The ground

was thick with the furry snow, but he sat slightly above it on a hard,

flat object.

Sled, he knew abruptly. He was sitting on a thing called sled. And

the sled itself seemed to be poised at the top of a long, extended

The Giver Page 84 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

mound that rose from the very land where he was. Even as he

thought the word "mound," his new consciousness told him hill.

Then the sled, with Jonas himself upon it, began to move through

the snowfall, and he understood instantly that now he was going

downhill. No voice made an explanation. The experience explained

itself to him.

His face cut through the frigid air as he began the

82

descent, moving through the substance called snow on the vehicle

called sled, which propelled itself on what he now knew without

doubt to be runners.

Comprehending all of those things as he sped downward, he was

free to enjoy the breathless glee that overwhelmed him: the speed,

the clear cold air, the total silence, the feeling of balance and

excitement and peace.

Then, as the angle of incline lessened, as the mound--the hill--

flattened, nearing the bottom, the sled's forward motion slowed.

The snow was piled now around it, and he pushed with his body,

moving it forward, not wanting the exhilarating ride to end.

Finally the obstruction of the piled snow was too much for the thin

runners of the sled, and he came to a stop. He sat there for a

moment, panting, holding the rope in his cold hands. Tentatively he

opened his eyes--not his snow-hill-sled eyes, for they had been

open throughout the strange ride. He opened his ordinary eyes,

and saw that he was still on the bed, that he had not moved at all.

The old man, still beside the bed, was watching him. "How do you

feel?" he asked.

The Giver Page 85 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas sat up and tried to answer honestly. "Surprised," he said,

after a moment.

The old man wiped his forehead with his sleeve. "Whew," he said.

"It was exhausting. But you know, even transmitting that tiny

memory to you--I think it lightened me just a little."

"Do you mean--you did say I could ask questions?"

The man nodded, encouraging his question.

"Do you mean that now you don't have the memory of it--of that ride

on the sled--anymore?"

83

"That's right. A little weight off this old body."

"But it was such fun! And now you don't have it anymore! I took it

from you!"

But the old man laughed. "All I gave you was one ride, on one sled,

in one snow, on one hill. I have a whole world of them in my

memory. I could give them to you one by one, a thousand times,

and there would still be more."

"Are you saying that I--I mean we--could do it again?" Jonas asked.

"I'd really like to. I think I could steer, by pulling the rope. I didn't try

this time, because it was so new."

The old man, laughing, shook his head. "Maybe another day, for a

treat. But there's no time, really, just to play. I only wanted to begin

by showing you how it works.

"Now," he said, turning businesslike, "lie back down. I want to --"

The Giver Page 86 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas did. He was eager for whatever experience would come

next. But he had, suddenly, so many questions.

"Why don't we have snow, and sleds, and hills?" he asked. "And

when did we, in the past? Did my parents have sleds when they

were young? Did you?"

The old man shrugged and gave a short laugh. "No," he told Jonas.

"It's a very distant memory. That's why it was so exhausting--I had

to tug it forward from many generations back. It was given to me

when I was a new Receiver, and the previous Receiver had to pull

it through a long time period, too."

"But what happened to those things? Snow, and the rest of it?"

"Climate Control. Snow made growing food difficult, limited the

agricultural periods. And unpredictable

84

weather made transportation almost impossible at times. It wasn't a

practical thing, so it became obsolete when we went to Sameness.

"And hills, too," he added. "They made conveyance of goods

unwieldy. Trucks; buses. Slowed them down. So--" He waved his

hand, as if a gesture had caused hills to disappear. "Sameness," he

concluded.

Jonas frowned. "I wish we had those things, still. Just now and

then."

The old man smiled. "So do I," he said. "But that choice is not ours."

"But sir," Jonas suggested, "since you have so much power--"

The man corrected him. "Honor," he said firmly. "I have great

The Giver Page 87 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

honor. So will you. But you will find that that is not the same as

power.

"Lie quietly now. Since we've entered into the topic of climate, let

me give you something else. And this time I'm not going to tell you

the name of it, because I want to test the receiving. You should be

able to perceive the name without being told. I gave away snow

and sled and downhill and runners by telling them to you in

advance."

Without being instructed, Jonas closed his eyes again. He felt the

hands on his back again. He waited.

Now it came more quickly, the feelings. This time the hands didn't

become cold, but instead began to feel warm on his body. They

moistened a little. The warmth spread, extending across his

shoulders, up his neck, onto the side of his face. He could feel it

through his clothed parts, too: a pleasant, all-over sensation; and

when he licked his lips this time, the air was hot and heavy.

85

He didn't move. There was no sled. His posture didn't change. He

was simply alone someplace, out of doors, lying down, and the

warmth came from far above. It was not as exciting as the ride

through the snowy air; but it was pleasurable and comforting.

Suddenly he perceived the word for it: sunshine. He perceived that

it came from the sky. Then it ended.

"Sunshine," he said aloud, opening his eyes.

"Good. You did get the word. That makes my job easier. Not so

much explaining."

The Giver Page 88 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"And it came from the sky." "That's right," the old man said. "Just

the way it used to.

"Before Sameness. Before Climate Control," Jonas added.

The man laughed. "You receive well, and learn quickly. I'm very

pleased with you. That's enough for today, I think. We're off to a

good start."

There was a question bothering Jonas. "Sir," he said, "The Chief

Elder told me--she told everyone--and you told me, too, that it

would be painful. So I was a little scared. But it didn't hurt at all. I

really enjoyed it." He looked quizzically at the old man.

The man sighed. "I started you with memories of pleasure. My

previous failure gave me the wisdom to do that." He took a few

deep breaths. "Jonas," he said, "it will be painful. But it need not be

painful yet."

"I'm brave. I really am." Jonas sat up a little straighter.

The old man looked at him for a moment. He smiled.

"I can see that," he said. "Well, since you asked the

86

question--I think I have enough energy for one more transmission.

"Lie down once more. This will be the last today."

Jonas obeyed cheerfully. He dosed his eyes, waiting, and felt the

hands again; then he felt the warmth again, the sunshine again,

coming from the sky of this other consciousness that was so new to

him. This time, as he lay basking in the wonderful warmth, he felt

the passage of time. His real self was aware that it was only a

The Giver Page 89 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

what to call you."

The man had sat back down in the comfortable upholstered chair.

He moved his shoulders around as if to ease away an aching

sensation. He seemed terribly weary.

"Call me The Giver," he told Jonas.

88

12

"You slept soundly, Jonas?" his mother asked at the morning meal.

"No dreams?"

Jonas simply smiled and nodded, not ready to lie, not willing to tell

the truth. "I slept very soundly," he said.

"I wish this one would," his father said, leaning down from his chair

to touch Gabriel's waving fist. The basket was on the floor beside

him; in its corner, beside Gabriel's head, the smiled hippo sat

staring with its blank eyes.

"So do I," Mother said, rolling her eyes. "He's so fretful at night."

Jonas had not heard the newchild during the night because as

always, he had slept soundly. But it was not true that he had no

dreams.

Again and again, as he slept, he had slid down that snow-covered

hill. Always, in the dream, it seemed as if there were a destination:

a something-- he could not grasp what--that lay beyond the place

where the thickness of snow brought the sled to a stop.

He was left, upon awakening, with the feeling that he wanted, even

The Giver Page 91 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

somehow needed, to reach the something that waited in the

distance. The feeling that it was good. That it was welcoming. That

it was significant.

89

But he did not know how to get there.

He tried to shed the leftover dream, gathering his schoolwork and

preparing for the day.

School seemed a little different today. The classes were the same:

language and communications; commerce and industry; science

and technology; civil procedures and government. But during the

breaks for recreation periods and the midday meal, the other new

Twelves were abuzz with descriptions of their first day of training.

All of them talked at once, interrupting each other, hastily making

the required apology for interrupting, then forgetting again in the

excitement of describing the new experiences.

Jonas listened. He was very aware of his own admonition not to

discuss his training. But it would have been impossible, anyway.

There was no way to describe to his friends what he had

experienced there in the Annex room. How could you describe a

sled without describing a hill and snow; and how could you describe

a hill and snow to someone who had never felt height or wind or

that feathery, magical cold?

Even trained for years as they all had been in precision of

language, what words could you use which would give another the

experience of sunshine?

So it was easy for Jonas to be still and to listen.

After school hours he rode again beside Fiona to the House of the

The Giver Page 92 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Old.

"I looked for you yesterday," she told him, "so we could ride home

together. Your bike was still there, and I waited for a little while. But

it was getting late, so I went on home."

"I apologize for making you wait," Jonas said.

90

"I accept your apology," she replied automatically.

"I stayed a little longer than I expected," Jonas explained.

She pedaled forward silently, and he knew that she expected him to

tell her why. She expected him to describe his first day of training.

But to ask would have fallen into the category of rudeness.

"You've been doing so many volunteer hours with the Old," Jonas

said, changing the subject. "There won't be much that you don't

already know."

"Oh, there's lots to learn," Fiona replied. "There's administrative

work, and the dietary rules, and punishment for disobedience--did

you know that they use a discipline wand on the Old, the same as

for small children? And there's occupational therapy, and

recreational activities, and medications, and--"

They reached the building and braked their bikes.

"I really think I'll like it better than school," Fiona confessed.

"Me too," Jonas agreed, wheeling his bike into its place.

She waited for a second, as if, again, she expected him to go on.

Then she looked at her watch, waved, and hurried toward the

The Giver Page 93 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

entrance.

Jonas stood for a moment beside his bike, startled. It had

happened again: the thing that he thought of now as "seeing

beyond." This time it had been Fiona who had undergone that

fleeting indescribable change. As he looked up and toward her

going through the door, it happened; she changed. Actually, Jonas

thought, trying to recreate it in his mind, it wasn't Fiona in her

entirety. It

91

seemed to be just her hair. And just for that flickering instant.

He ran through it in his mind. It was clearly beginning to happen

more often. First, the apple a few weeks before. The next time had

been the faces in the audience at the Auditorium, just two days

ago. Now, today, Fiona's hair.

Frowning, Jonas walked toward the Annex. I will ask the Giver, he

decided.

The old man looked up, smiling, when Jonas entered the room. He

was already seated beside the bed, and he seemed more energetic

today, slightly renewed, and glad to see Jonas.

"Welcome," he said. "We must get started. You're one minute late."

"I apologi--" Jonas began, and then stopped, flustered,

remembering there were to be no apologies.

He removed his tunic and went to the bed. "I'm one minute late

because something happened," he explained. "And I'd like to ask

you about it, if you don't mind."

"You may ask me anything."

The Giver Page 94 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas tried to sort it out in his mind so that he could explain it

clearly. "I think it's what you call seeing-beyond," he said.

The Giver nodded. "Describe it," he said.

Jonas told him about the experience with the apple. Then the

moment on the stage, when he had looked out and seen the same

phenomenon in the faces of the crowd.

"Then today, just now, outside, it happened with my friend Fiona.

She herself didn't change, exactly. But something about her

changed for a second. Her hair looked different; but not in its

shape, not in its length. I can't

92

quite- " Jonas paused, frustrated by his inability to grasp and

describe exactly what had occurred.

Finally he simply said, "It changed. I don't know how, or why."

"That's why I was one minute late," he concluded, and looked

questioningly at The Giver.

To his surprise, the old man asked him a question which seemed

unrelated to the seeing-beyond. "When I gave you the memory

yesterday, the first one, the ride on the sled, did you look around?"

Jonas nodded. "Yes," he said, "but the stuff-- I mean the snow--in

the air made it hard to see anything."

"Did you look at the sled?"

Jonas thought back. "No. I only felt it under me. I dreamed of it last

night, too. But I don't remember seeing the sled in my dream,

either. Just feeling it."

The Giver Page 95 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

The Giver seemed to be thinking.

"When I was observing you, before the selection, I perceived that

you probably had the capacity, and what you describe confirms

that. It happened somewhat differently to me," The Giver told him.

"When I was just your age--about to become the new Receiver--I

began to experience it, though it took a different form. With me it

was ... well, I won't describe that now; you wouldn't understand it

yet.

"But I think I can guess how it's happening with you. Let me just

make a little test, to confirm my guess. Lie down."

Jonas lay on the bed again with his hands at his sides. He felt

comfortable here now. He dosed his eyes and waited for the

familiar feel of The Giver's hands on his back.

93

But it didn't come. Instead, The Giver instructed him, "Call back the

memory of the ride on the sled. Just the beginning of it, where

you're at the top of the hill, before the slide starts. And this time,

look down at the sled."

Jonas was puzzled. He opened his eyes. "Excuse me," he asked

politely, "but don't you have to give me the memory?"

"It's your memory, now, It's not mine to experience any longer. I

gave it away."

"But how can I call it back?"

"You can remember last year, or the year that you were a Seven, or

a Five, can't you?"

"Of course."

The Giver Page 96 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"It's much the same. Everyone in the community has one-
generation memories like those. But now you will be able to go

back farther. Try. Just concentrate."

Jonas closed his eyes again. He took a deep breath and sought the

sled and the hill and the snow in his consciousness.

There they were, with no effort. He was again sitting in that whirling

world of snowflakes, atop the hill.

Jonas grinned with delight, and blew his own steamy breath into

view. Then, as he had been instructed, he looked down. He saw his

own hands, furred again with snow, holding the rope. He saw his

legs, and moved them aside for a glimpse of the sled beneath.

Dumbfounded, he stared at it. This time it was not a fleeting

impression. This time the sled had--and continued to have, as he

blinked, and stared at it again--that same mysterious quality that

the apple had had so briefly. And Fiona's hair. The sled did not

change. It simply was--whatever the thing was.

94

Jonas opened his eyes and was still on the bed. The Giver was

watching him curiously.

"Yes," Jonas said slowly. "I saw it, in the sled."

"Let me try one more thing. Look over there, to the bookcase. Do

you see the very top row of books, the ones behind the table, on

the top shelf?"

Jonas sought them with his eyes. He stared at them, and they

changed. But the change was fleeting. It slipped away the next

instant.

The Giver Page 97 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"It happened," Jonas said. "It happened to the books, but it went

away again."

"I'm right, then," The Giver said. "You're beginning to see the color

red."

"The what?"

The Giver sighed. "How to explain this? Once, back in the time of

the memories, everything had a shape and size, the way things still

do, but they also had a quality called color.

"There were a lot of colors, and one of them was called red. That's

the one you are starting to see. Your friend Fiona has red hair--

quite distinctive, actually; I've noticed it before. When you

mentioned Fiona's hair, it was the clue that told me you were

probably beginning to see the color red."

"And the faces of people? The ones I saw at the Ceremony?"

The Giver shook his head. "No, flesh isn't red. But it has red tones

in it. There was a time, actually--you'll see this in the memories

later--when flesh was many different colors. That was before we

went to Sameness. Today flesh is all the same, and what you saw

was the red tones.

95

Probably when you saw the faces take on color it wasn't as deep or

vibrant as the apple, or your friend's hair."

The Giver chuckled, suddenly. "We've never completely mastered

Sameness. I suppose the genetic scientists are still hard at work

trying to work the kinks out. Hair like Fiona's must drive them

crazy."

The Giver Page 98 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

Jonas listened, trying hard to comprehend. "And the sled?" he said.

"It had that same thing: the color red. But it didn't change, Giver. It

just was."

"Because it's a memory from the time when color was."

"It was so--oh, I wish language were more precise! The red was so

beautiful!"

The Giver nodded. "It is."

"Do you see it all the time?"

"I see all of them. All the colors."

"Will I?"

"Of course. When you receive the memories. You have the capacity

to see beyond. You'll gain wisdom, then, along with colors. And lots

more."

Jonas wasn't interested, just then, in wisdom. It was the colors that

fascinated him. "Why can't everyone see them? Why did colors

disappear?"

The Giver shrugged. "Our people made that choice, the choice to

go to Sameness. Before my time, before the previous time, back

and back and back. We relinquished color when we relinquished

sunshine and did away with differences." He thought for a moment.

"We gained control of many things. But we had to let go of others."

"We shouldn't have!" Jonas said fiercely.

The Giver looked startled at the certainty of Jonas's reaction. Then

he smiled wryly. "You've come very quickly

The Giver Page 99 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

96

to that conclusion," he said. "It took me many years. Maybe your

wisdom will come much more quickly than mine."

He glanced at the wall clock. "Lie back down, now. We have so

much to do."

"Giver," Jonas asked as he arranged himself again on the bed,

"how did it happen to you when you were becoming The Receiver?

You said that the seeing-beyond happened to you, but not the

same way."

The hands came to his back. "Another day," The Giver said gently.

"I'll tell you another day. Now we must work. And I've thought of a

way to help you with the concept of color.

"Close your eyes and be still, now. I'm going to give you a memory

of a rainbow."

97

13

Days went by, and weeks. Jonas learned, through the memories,

the names of colors; and now he began to see them all, in his

ordinary life (though he knew it was ordinary no longer, and would

never be again). But they didn't last. There would be a glimpse of

green--the landscaped lawn around the Central Plaza; a bush on

the riverbank. The bright orange of pumpkins being trucked in from

the agricultural fields beyond the community boundary--seen in an

instant, the flash of brilliant color, but gone again, returning to their

flat and hueless shade.

The Giver told him that it would be a very long time before he had

The Giver Page 100 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

the colors to keep.

"But I want them!" Jonas said angrily. "It isn't fair that nothing has

color!"

"Not fair?" The Giver looked at Jonas curiously. "Explain what you

mean."

"Well ... "Jonas had to stop and think it through. "If everything's the

same, then there aren't any choices! I want to wake up in the

morning and decide things! A blue tunic, or a red one?"

He looked down at himself, at the colorless fabric of his clothing.

"But it's all the same, always."

98

Then he laughed a little. "I know it's not important, what you wear. It

doesn't matter. But--"

"It's the choosing that's important, isn't it?" The Giver asked him.

Jonas nodded. "My little brother--" he began, and then corrected

himself. "No, that's inaccurate. He's not my brother, not really. But

this newchild that my family takes care of-- his name's Gabriel?"

"Yes, I know about Gabriel."

"Well, he's right at the age where he's learning so much. He grabs

toys when we hold them in front of him--my father says he's

learning small-muscle control. And he's really cute."

The Giver nodded.

"But now that I can see colors, at least sometimes, I was just

thinking: what if we could hold up things that were bright red, or

The Giver Page 101 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

bright yellow, and he could choose? Instead of the Sameness."

"He might make wrong choices."

"Oh." Jonas was silent for a minute. "Oh, I see what you mean. It

wouldn't matter for a newchild's toy. But later it does matter, doesn't

it? We don't dare to let people make choices of their own."

"Not safe?" The Giver suggested.

"Definitely not safe," Jonas said with certainty. "What if they were

allowed to choose their own mate? And chose wrong?

"Or what if," he went on, almost laughing at the absurdity, "they

chose their own jobs?"

"Frightening, isn't it?" The Giver said.

Jonas chuckled. "Very frightening. I can't even imagine it. We really

have to protect people from wrong choices."

99

"It's safer."

"Yes," Jonas agreed. "Much safer."

But when the conversation turned to other things, Jonas was left,

still, with a feeling of frustration that he didn't understand.

He found that he was often angry, now: irrationally angry at his

groupmates, that they were satisfied with their lives which had none

of the vibrance his own was taking on. And he was angry at

himself, that he could not change that for them.

He tried. Without asking permission from The Giver, because he

The Giver Page 102 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

feared--or knew--that it would be denied, he tried to give his new

awareness to his friends.

"Asher," Jonas said one morning, "look at those flowers very

carefully." They were standing beside a bed of geraniums planted

near the Hall of Open Records. He put his hands on Asher's

shoulders, and concentrated on the red of the petals, trying to hold

it as long as he could, and trying at the same time to transmit the

awareness of red to his friend.

"What's the matter?" Asher asked uneasily. "Is something wrong?"

He moved away from Jonas's hands. It was extremely rude for one

citizen to touch another outside of family units.

"No, nothing. I thought for a minute that they were wilting, and we

should let the Gardening Crew know they needed more watering."

Jonas sighed, and turned away.

One evening he came home from his training weighted with new

knowledge. The Giver had chosen a startling and disturbing

memory that day. Under the touch of his hands, Jonas had found

himself suddenly in a place that was completely alien: hot and

windswept under a vast

100

blue sky. There were tufts of sparse grass, a few bushes and rocks,

and nearby he could see an area of thicker vegetation: broad, low

trees outlined against the sky. He could hear noises: the sharp

crack of weapons--he perceived the word guns-- and then shouts,

and an immense crashing thud as something fell, tearing branches

from the trees.

He heard voices calling to one another. Peering from the place

where he stood hidden behind some shrubbery, he was reminded

The Giver Page 103 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

of what The Giver had told him, that there had been a time when

flesh had different colors. Two of these men had dark brown skin;

the others were light. Going closer, he watched them hack the

tusks from a motionless elephant on the ground and haul them

away, spattered with blood. He felt himself overwhelmed with a new

perception of the color he knew as red.

Then the men were gone, speeding toward the horizon in a vehicle

that spit pebbles from its whirling tires. One hit his forehead and

stung him there. But the memory continued, though Jonas ached

now for it to end.

Now he saw another elephant emerge from the place where it had

stood hidden in the trees. Very slowly it walked to the mutilated

body and looked down. With its sinuous trunk it stroked the huge

corpse; then it reached up, broke some leafy branches with a snap,

and draped them over the mass of torn thick flesh.

Finally it tilted its massive head, raised its trunk, and roared into the

empty landscape. Jonas had never heard such a sound. It was a

sound of rage and grief and it seemed never to end.

He could still hear it when he opened his eyes and lay anguished

on the bed where he received the memories.

101

It continued to roar into his consciousness as he pedaled slowly

home.

"Lily," he asked that evening when his sister took her comfort

object, the stuffed elephant, from the shelf, "did you know that once

there really were elephants? Live ones?"

She glanced down at the ragged comfort object and grinned.

The Giver Page 104 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"Right," she said, skeptically. "Sure, Jonas."

Jonas went and sat beside them while his father untied Lily's hair

ribbons and combed her hair. He placed one hand on each of their

shoulders. With all of his being he tried to give each of them a piece

of the memory: not of the tortured cry of the elephant, but of the

being of the elephant, of the towering, immense creature and the

meticulous touch with which it had tended its friend at the end.

But his father had continued to comb Lily's long hair, and Lily,

impatient, had finally wiggled under her brother's touch. "Jonas,"

she said, "you're hurting me with your hand."

"I apologize for hurting you, Lily," Jonas mumbled, and took his

hand away.

" 'Ccept your apology," Lily responded indifferently, stroking the

lifeless elephant.

"Giver," Jonas asked once, as they prepared for the day's work,

"don't you have a spouse? Aren't you allowed to apply for one?"

Although he was exempted from the rules against rudeness, he

was aware that this was a rude question. But The Giver had

encouraged all of his questions, not seeming to be embarrassed or

offended by even the most personal.

The Giver chuckled. "No, there's no rule against it.

102

And I did have a spouse. You're forgetting how old I am, Jonas. My

former spouse lives now with the Childless Adults."

"Oh, of course." Jonas had forgotten The Giver's obvious age.

When adults of the community became older, their lives became

The Giver Page 105 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

different. They were no longer needed to create family units.

Jonas's own parents, when he and Lily were grown, would go to

live with the Childless Adults.

"You'll be able to apply for a spouse, Jonas, if you want to. I'll warn

you, though, that it will be difficult. Your living arrangements will

have to be different from those of most family units, because the

books are forbidden to citizens. You and I are the only ones with

access to the books."

Jonas glanced around at the astonishing array of volumes. From

time to time, now, he could see their colors. With their hours

together, his and The Giver's, consumed by conversation and by

the transmission of memories, Jonas had not yet opened any of the

books. But he read the titles here and there, and knew that they

contained all of the knowledge of centuries, and that one day they

would belong to him.

"So if I have a spouse, and maybe children, I will have to hide the

books from them?"

The Giver nodded. "I wasn't permitted to share the books with my

spouse, that's correct. And there are other difficulties, too. You

remember the rule that says the new Receiver can't talk about his

training?"

Jonas nodded. Of course he remembered. It had turned out, by far,

to be the most frustrating of the rules he was required to obey.

103

"When you become the official Receiver, when we're finished here,

you'll be given a whole new set of rules. Those are the rules that I

obey. And it won't surprise you that I am forbidden to talk about my

work to anyone except the new Receiver. That's you, of course.

The Giver Page 106 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

"So there will be a whole part of your life which you won't be able to

share with a family. It's hard, Jonas. It was hard for me.

"You do understand, don't you, that this is my life? The memories?"

Jonas nodded again, but he was puzzled. Didn't life consist of the

things you did each day? There wasn't anything else, really. "I've

seen you taking walks," he said.

The Giver sighed. "I walk. I eat at mealtime. And when I am called

by the Committee of Elders, I appear before them, to give them

counsel and advice."

"Do you advise them often?" Jonas was a little frightened at the

thought that one day he would be the one to advise the ruling body.

But the Giver said no. "Rarely. Only when they are faced with

something that they have not experienced before. Then they call

upon me to use the memories and advise them. But it very seldom

happens. Sometimes I wish they'd ask for my wisdom more often--

there are so many things I could tell them; things I wish they would

change. But they don't want change. Life here is so orderly, so

predictable--so painless. It's what they've chosen."

"I don't know why they even need a Receiver, then, if they never

call upon him," Jonas commented.

"They need me. And you," The Giver said, but didn't explain. "They

were reminded of that ten years ago."

104

"What happened ten years ago?" Jonas asked. "Oh, I know. You

tried to train a successor and it failed. Why? Why did that remind

them?"

The Giver Page 107 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

The Giver smiled grimly. "When the new Receiver failed, the

memories that she had received were released. They didn't come

back to me. They went ... "

He paused, and seemed to be struggling with the concept. "I don't

know, exactly. They went to the place where memories once

existed before Receivers were created. Someplace out there--" He

gestured vaguely with his arm. "And then the people had access to

them. Apparently that's the way it was, once. Everyone had access

to memories.

"It was chaos," he said. "They really suffered for a while. Finally it

subsided as the memories were assimilated. But it certainly made

them aware of how they need a Receiver to contain all that pain.

And knowledge."

"But you have to suffer like that all the time," Jonas pointed out.

The Giver nodded. "And you will. It's my life. It will be yours."

Jonas thought about it, about what it would be like for him. "Along

with walking and eating and--" He looked around the walls of books.

"Reading? That's it?"

The Giver shook his head. "Those are simply the things that I do.

My life is here."

"In this room?"

The Giver shook his head. He put his hands to his own face, to his

chest. "No. Here, in my being. Where the memories are."

"My Instructors in science and technology have taught

105

The Giver Page 108 of 182

file://C:\unzipped\The_Giver_Chelsea__Poplow\The_Giver.xml 10/19/2010

us about how the brain works," Jonas told him eagerly. "It's full of

electrical impulses. It's like a computer. If you stimulate one part of

the brain with an electrode, it--" He stopped talking. He could see

an odd look on The Giver's face.

"They know nothing," The Giver said bitterly.

Jonas was shocked. Since the first day in the Annex room, they

had together disregarded the rules about rudeness, and Jonas felt

comfortable with that now. But this was different, and far beyond

rude. This was a terrible accusation. What if someone had heard?

He glanced quickly at the wall speaker, terrified that the Committee

might be listening as they could at any time. But, as always during

their sessions together, the switch had been turned to OFF.

"Nothing?" Jonas whispered nervously. "But my instructors--"

The Giver flicked his hand as if brushing something aside. "Oh,

your instructors are well trained. They know their scientific facts.

Everyone is well trained for his job.

"It's just that ... without the memories it's all meaningless. They

gave that burden to me. And to the previous Receiver. And the one

before him."

"And back and back and back," Jonas said, knowing the phrase

that always came.

The Giver smiled, though his smile was oddly harsh. "That's right.

And next it will be you. A great honor."

"Yes, sir. They told me that at the Ceremony. The very highest

honor."

Some afternoons The Giver sent him away without training. Jonas

unger and more vulnerable years my father gave
me some advice that Ive been turning over in my mind
ever since.
Whenever you feel like criticizing any one, he told me,
just remember that all the people in this world havent had
the advantages that youve had.
He didnt say any more but weve always been unusually
communicative in a reserved way, and I understood that he
meant a great deal more than that. In consequence Im inclined
to reserve all judgments, a habit that has opened up
many curious natures to me and also made me the victim
of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick to
detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a
normal person, and so it came about that in college I was
unjustly accused of being a politician, because I was privy
to the secret griefs of wild, unknown men. Most of the confidences
were unsoughtfrequently I have feigned sleep,
preoccupation, or a hostile levity when I realized by some
unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering
on the horizonfor the intimate revelations of young
men or at least the terms in which they express them are
usually plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions.
Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite hope. I am still
a little afraid of missing something if I forget that, as my fa-
 The Great Gatsby
ther snobbishly suggested, and I snobbishly repeat a sense
of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out unequally at
birth.
And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to
the admission that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded
on the hard rock or the wet marshes but after a certain point
I dont care what its founded on. When I came back from
the East last autumn I felt that I wanted the world to be in
uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I wanted
no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses
into the human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his
name to this book, was exempt from my reactionGatsby
who represented everything for which I have an unaffected
scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of successful
gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him,
some heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he
were related to one of those intricate machines that register
earthquakes ten thousand miles away. This responsiveness
had nothing to do with that flabby impressionability which
is dignified under the name of the creative temperament
it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness
such as I have never found in any other person and which
it is not likely I shall ever find again. NoGatsby turned
out all right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what
foul dust floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily
closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and shortwinded
elations of men.
My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in
this middle-western city for three generations. The Car-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
raways are something of a clan and we have a tradition that
were descended from the Dukes of Buccleuch, but the actual
founder of my line was my grandfathers brother who
came here in fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil War and
started the wholesale hardware business that my father carries
on today.
I never saw this great-uncle but Im supposed to look
like himwith special reference to the rather hard-boiled
painting that hangs in Fathers office. I graduated from New
Haven in 1915, just a quarter of a century after my father,
and a little later I participated in that delayed Teutonic migration
known as the Great War. I enjoyed the counter-raid
so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being the
warm center of the world the middle-west now seemed like
the ragged edge of the universeso I decided to go east and
learn the bond business. Everybody I knew was in the bond
business so I supposed it could support one more single
man. All my aunts and uncles talked it over as if they were
choosing a prep-school for me and finally said, Whyyees
with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance
me for a year and after various delays I came east, permanently,
I thought, in the spring of twenty-two.
The practical thing was to find rooms in the city but it was
a warm season and I had just left a country of wide lawns
and friendly trees, so when a young man at the office suggested
that we take a house together in a commuting town
it sounded like a great idea. He found the house, a weather
beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a month, but at the
last minute the firm ordered him to Washington and I went 
 The Great Gatsby
out to the country alone. I had a dog, at least I had him for a
few days until he ran away, and an old Dodge and a Finnish
woman who made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered
Finnish wisdom to herself over the electric stove.
It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man,
more recently arrived than I, stopped me on the road.
How do you get to West Egg village? he asked helplessly.
I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I
was a guide, a pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually
conferred on me the freedom of the neighborhood.
And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves
growing on the treesjust as things grow in fast moviesI
had that familiar conviction that life was beginning over
again with the summer.
There was so much to read for one thing and so much
fine health to be pulled down out of the young breath-giving
air. I bought a dozen volumes on banking and credit and
investment securities and they stood on my shelf in red and
gold like new money from the mint, promising to unfold
the shining secrets that only Midas and Morgan and Maecenas
knew. And I had the high intention of reading many
other books besides. I was rather literary in collegeone
year I wrote a series of very solemn and obvious editorials
for the Yale Newsand now I was going to bring back all
such things into my life and become again that most limited
of all specialists, the well-rounded man. This isnt just an
epigramlife is much more successfully looked at from a
single window, after all.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a
house in one of the strangest communities in North America.
It was on that slender riotous island which extends itself
due east of New York and where there are, among other
natural curiosities, two unusual formations of land. Twenty
miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in
contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into
the most domesticated body of salt water in the Western
Hemisphere, the great wet barnyard of Long Island Sound.
They are not perfect ovalslike the egg in the Columbus
story they are both crushed flat at the contact endbut
their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual
confusion to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a
more arresting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every
particular except shape and size.
I lived at West Egg, thewell, the less fashionable of the
two, though this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre
and not a little sinister contrast between them. My
house was at the very tip of the egg, only fifty yards from the
Sound, and squeezed between two huge places that rented
for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on my right
was a colossal affair by any standardit was a factual imitation
of some Htel de Ville in Normandy, with a tower on
one side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a
marble swimming pool and more than forty acres of lawn
and garden. It was Gatsbys mansion. Or rather, as I didnt
know Mr. Gatsby it was a mansion inhabited by a gentleman
of that name. My own house was an eye-sore, but it
was a small eye-sore, and it had been overlooked, so I had a 
 The Great Gatsby
view of the water, a partial view of my neighbors lawn, and
the consoling proximity of millionairesall for eighty dollars
a month.
Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable
East Egg glittered along the water, and the history of the
summer really begins on the evening I drove over there to
have dinner with the Tom Buchanans. Daisy was my second
cousin once removed and Id known Tom in college. And
just after the war I spent two days with them in Chicago.
Her husband, among various physical accomplishments,
had been one of the most powerful ends that ever played
football at New Havena national figure in a way, one of
those men who reach such an acute limited excellence at
twenty-one that everything afterward savors of anti-climax.
His family were enormously wealthyeven in college
his freedom with money was a matter for reproachbut
now hed left Chicago and come east in a fashion that rather
took your breath away: for instance hed brought down a
string of polo ponies from Lake Forest. It was hard to realize
that a man in my own generation was wealthy enough
to do that.
Why they came east I dont know. They had spent a year
in France, for no particular reason, and then drifted here
and there unrestfully wherever people played polo and were
rich together. This was a permanent move, said Daisy over
the telephone, but I didnt believe itI had no sight into
Daisys heart but I felt that Tom would drift on forever seeking
a little wistfully for the dramatic turbulence of some
irrecoverable football game.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I
drove over to East Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely
knew at all. Their house was even more elaborate than I
expected, a cheerful red and white Georgian Colonial mansion
overlooking the bay. The lawn started at the beach and
ran toward the front door for a quarter of a mile, jumping
over sun-dials and brick walks and burning gardensfinally
when it reached the house drifting up the side in bright
vines as though from the momentum of its run. The front
was broken by a line of French windows, glowing now with
reflected gold, and wide open to the warm windy afternoon,
and Tom Buchanan in riding clothes was standing with his
legs apart on the front porch.
He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he
was a sturdy, straw haired man of thirty with a rather hard
mouth and a supercilious manner. Two shining, arrogant
eyes had established dominance over his face and gave him
the appearance of always leaning aggressively forward. Not
even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes could hide
the enormous power of that bodyhe seemed to fill those
glistening boots until he strained the top lacing and you
could see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder
moved under his thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous
leveragea cruel body.
His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression
of fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of
paternal contempt in it, even toward people he likedand
there were men at New Haven who had hated his guts.
Now, dont think my opinion on these matters is final, 
10 The Great Gatsby
he seemed to say, just because Im stronger and more of a
man than you are. We were in the same Senior Society, and
while we were never intimate I always had the impression
that he approved of me and wanted me to like him with
some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own.
We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.
Ive got a nice place here, he said, his eyes flashing about
restlessly.
Turning me around by one arm he moved a broad flat
hand along the front vista, including in its sweep a sunken
Italian garden, a half acre of deep pungent roses and a snubnosed
motor boat that bumped the tide off shore.
It belonged to Demaine the oil man. He turned me
around again, politely and abruptly. Well go inside.
We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosycolored
space, fragilely bound into the house by French
windows at either end. The windows were ajar and gleaming
white against the fresh grass outside that seemed to grow a
little way into the house. A breeze blew through the room,
blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale flags,
twisting them up toward the frosted wedding cake of the
ceilingand then rippled over the wine-colored rug, making
a shadow on it as wind does on the sea.
The only completely stationary object in the room was an
enormous couch on which two young women were buoyed
up as though upon an anchored balloon. They were both
in white and their dresses were rippling and fluttering as if
they had just been blown back in after a short flight around
the house. I must have stood for a few moments listening to 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 11
the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a picture
on the wall. Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan
shut the rear windows and the caught wind died out about
the room and the curtains and the rugs and the two young
women ballooned slowly to the floor.
The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was
extended full length at her end of the divan, completely
motionless and with her chin raised a little as if she were
balancing something on it which was quite likely to fall. If
she saw me out of the corner of her eyes she gave no hint of
itindeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring an apology
for having disturbed her by coming in.
The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to riseshe
leaned slightly forward with a conscientious expression
then she laughed, an absurd, charming little laugh, and I
laughed too and came forward into the room.
Im p-paralyzed with happiness.
She laughed again, as if she said something very witty,
and held my hand for a moment, looking up into my face,
promising that there was no one in the world she so much
wanted to see. That was a way she had. She hinted in a murmur
that the surname of the balancing girl was Baker. (Ive
heard it said that Daisys murmur was only to make people
lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less
charming.)
At any rate Miss Bakers lips fluttered, she nodded at me
almost imperceptibly and then quickly tipped her head back
againthe object she was balancing had obviously tottered
a little and given her something of a fright. Again a sort of 
12 The Great Gatsby
apology arose to my lips. Almost any exhibition of complete
self sufficiency draws a stunned tribute from me.
I looked back at my cousin who began to ask me questions
in her low, thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that
the ear follows up and down as if each speech is an arrangement
of notes that will never be played again. Her face was
sad and lovely with bright things in it, bright eyes and a
bright passionate mouthbut there was an excitement in
her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to
forget: a singing compulsion, a whispered Listen, a promise
that she had done gay, exciting things just a while since
and that there were gay, exciting things hovering in the next
hour.
I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on
my way east and how a dozen people had sent their love
through me.
Do they miss me? she cried ecstatically.
The whole town is desolate. All the cars have the left rear
wheel painted black as a mourning wreath and theres a persistent
wail all night along the North Shore.
How gorgeous! Lets go back, Tom. Tomorrow! Then
she added irrelevantly, You ought to see the baby.
Id like to.
Shes asleep. Shes two years old. Havent you ever seen
her?
Never.
Well, you ought to see her. Shes
Tom Buchanan who had been hovering restlessly about
the room stopped and rested his hand on my shoulder.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 13
What you doing, Nick?
Im a bond man.
Who with?
I told him.
Never heard of them, he remarked decisively.
This annoyed me.
You will, I answered shortly. You will if you stay in the
East.
Oh, Ill stay in the East, dont you worry, he said, glancing
at Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for
something more. Id be a God Damned fool to live anywhere
else.
At this point Miss Baker said Absolutely! with such
suddenness that I startedit was the first word she uttered
since I came into the room. Evidently it surprised her as
much as it did me, for she yawned and with a series of rapid,
deft movements stood up into the room.
Im stiff, she complained, Ive been lying on that sofa
for as long as I can remember.
Dont look at me, Daisy retorted. Ive been trying to get
you to New York all afternoon.
No, thanks, said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in
from the pantry, Im absolutely in training.
Her host looked at her incredulously.
You are! He took down his drink as if it were a drop in
the bottom of a glass. How you ever get anything done is
beyond me.
I looked at Miss Baker wondering what it was she got
done. I enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-
14 The Great Gatsby
breasted girl, with an erect carriage which she accentuated
by throwing her body backward at the shoulders like a young
cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked back at me with
polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming discontented
face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a
picture of her, somewhere before.
You live in West Egg, she remarked contemptuously. I
know somebody there.
I dont know a single
You must know Gatsby.
Gatsby? demanded Daisy. What Gatsby?
Before I could reply that he was my neighbor dinner
was announced; wedging his tense arm imperatively under
mine Tom Buchanan compelled me from the room as
though he were moving a checker to another square.
Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips
the two young women preceded us out onto a rosy-colored
porch open toward the sunset where four candles flickered
on the table in the diminished wind.
Why CANDLES? objected Daisy, frowning. She
snapped them out with her fingers. In two weeks itll be the
longest day in the year. She looked at us all radiantly. Do
you always watch for the longest day of the year and then
miss it? I always watch for the longest day in the year and
then miss it.
We ought to plan something, yawned Miss Baker, sitting
down at the table as if she were getting into bed.
All right, said Daisy. Whatll we plan? She turned to
me helplessly. What do people plan?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 15
Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression
on her little finger.
Look! she complained. I hurt it.
We all lookedthe knuckle was black and blue.
You did it, Tom, she said accusingly. I know you didnt
mean to but you DID do it. Thats what I get for marrying
a brute of a man, a great big hulking physical specimen of
a
I hate that word hulking, objected Tom crossly, even in
kidding.
Hulking, insisted Daisy.
Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively
and with a bantering inconsequence that was never
quite chatter, that was as cool as their white dresses and
their impersonal eyes in the absence of all desire. They were
hereand they accepted Tom and me, making only a polite
pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They
knew that presently dinner would be over and a little later
the evening too would be over and casually put away. It was
sharply different from the West where an evening was hurried
from phase to phase toward its close in a continually
disappointed anticipation or else in sheer nervous dread of
the moment itself.
You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy, I confessed on my
second glass of corky but rather impressive claret. Cant
you talk about crops or something?
I meant nothing in particular by this remark but it was
taken up in an unexpected way.
Civilizations going to pieces, broke out Tom violently. 
16 The Great Gatsby
Ive gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you
read The Rise of the Coloured Empires by this man Goddard?
Why, no, I answered, rather surprised by his tone.
Well, its a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The
idea is if we dont look out the white race will bewill be utterly
submerged. Its all scientific stuff; its been proved.
Toms getting very profound, said Daisy with an expression
of unthoughtful sadness. He reads deep books with
long words in them. What was that word we
Well, these books are all scientific, insisted Tom, glancing
at her impatiently. This fellow has worked out the whole
thing. Its up to us who are the dominant race to watch out
or these other races will have control of things.
Weve got to beat them down, whispered Daisy, winking
ferociously toward the fervent sun.
You ought to live in California began Miss Baker but
Tom interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.
This idea is that were Nordics. I am, and you are and
you are and After an infinitesimal hesitation he included
Daisy with a slight nod and she winked at me again.
and weve produced all the things that go to make civilizationoh,
science and art and all that. Do you see?
There was something pathetic in his concentration as if
his complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to
him any more. When, almost immediately, the telephone
rang inside and the butler left the porch Daisy seized upon
the momentary interruption and leaned toward me.
Ill tell you a family secret, she whispered enthusiasti-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 17
cally. Its about the butlers nose. Do you want to hear about
the butlers nose?
Thats why I came over tonight.
Well, he wasnt always a butler; he used to be the silver
polisher for some people in New York that had a silver
service for two hundred people. He had to polish it from
morning till night until finally it began to affect his nose

Things went from bad to worse, suggested Miss Baker.
Yes. Things went from bad to worse until finally he had
to give up his position.
For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection
upon her glowing face; her voice compelled me forward
breathlessly as I listenedthen the glow faded, each light
deserting her with lingering regret like children leaving a
pleasant street at dusk.
The butler came back and murmured something close to
Toms ear whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair
and without a word went inside. As if his absence quickened
something within her Daisy leaned forward again, her voice
glowing and singing.
I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a
of a rose, an absolute rose. Doesnt he? She turned to Miss
Baker for confirmation. An absolute rose?
This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She
was only extemporizing but a stirring warmth flowed from
her as if her heart was trying to come out to you concealed
in one of those breathless, thrilling words. Then suddenly
she threw her napkin on the table and excused herself and 
18 The Great Gatsby
went into the house.
Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously
devoid of meaning. I was about to speak when she sat
up alertly and said Sh! in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned
murmur was audible in the room beyond and
Miss Baker leaned forward, unashamed, trying to hear. The
murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down,
mounted excitedly, and then ceased altogether.
This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbor I
said.
Dont talk. I want to hear what happens.
Is something happening? I inquired innocently.
You mean to say you dont know? said Miss Baker, honestly
surprised. I thought everybody knew.
I dont.
Why she said hesitantly, Toms got some woman
in New York.
Got some woman? I repeated blankly.
Miss Baker nodded.
She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinner-time.
Dont you think?
Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the
flutter of a dress and the crunch of leather boots and Tom
and Daisy were back at the table.
It couldnt be helped! cried Daisy with tense gayety.
She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and
then at me and continued: I looked outdoors for a minute
and its very romantic outdoors. Theres a bird on the lawn
that I think must be a nightingale come over on the Cunard 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 19
or White Star Line. Hes singing away her voice sang
Its romantic, isnt it, Tom?
Very romantic, he said, and then miserably to me: If
its light enough after dinner I want to take you down to the
stables.
The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook
her head decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact
all subjects, vanished into air. Among the broken fragments
of the last five minutes at table I remember the candles being
lit again, pointlessly, and I was conscious of wanting to look
squarely at every one and yet to avoid all eyes. I couldnt
guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking but I doubt if even
Miss Baker who seemed to have mastered a certain hardy
skepticism was able utterly to put this fifth guests shrill metallic
urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament the
situation might have seemed intriguingmy own instinct
was to telephone immediately for the police.
The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again.
Tom and Miss Baker, with several feet of twilight between
them strolled back into the library, as if to a vigil beside a
perfectly tangible body, while trying to look pleasantly interested
and a little deaf I followed Daisy around a chain
of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In its deep
gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.
Daisy took her face in her hands, as if feeling its lovely
shape, and her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet
dusk. I saw that turbulent emotions possessed her, so I asked
what I thought would be some sedative questions about her
little girl.
20 The Great Gatsby
We dont know each other very well, Nick, she said
suddenly. Even if we are cousins. You didnt come to my
wedding.
I wasnt back from the war.
Thats true. She hesitated. Well, Ive had a very bad
time, Nick, and Im pretty cynical about everything.
Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didnt say
any more, and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the
subject of her daughter.
I suppose she talks, andeats, and everything.
Oh, yes. She looked at me absently. Listen, Nick; let me
tell you what I said when she was born. Would you like to
hear?
Very much.
Itll show you how Ive gotten to feel aboutthings.
Well, she was less than an hour old and Tom was God knows
where. I woke up out of the ether with an utterly abandoned
feeling and asked the nurse right away if it was a boy or a
girl. She told me it was a girl, and so I turned my head away
and wept. All right, I said, Im glad its a girl. And I hope
shell be a foolthats the best thing a girl can be in this
world, a beautiful little fool.
You see I think everythings terrible anyhow, she went
on in a convinced way. Everybody thinks sothe most advanced
people. And I KNOW. Ive been everywhere and seen
everything and done everything. Her eyes flashed around
her in a defiant way, rather like Toms, and she laughed with
thrilling scorn. SophisticatedGod, Im sophisticated!
The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 21
attention, my belief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she
had said. It made me uneasy, as though the whole evening
had been a trick of some sort to exact a contributory emotion
from me. I waited, and sure enough, in a moment she
looked at me with an absolute smirk on her lovely face as if
she had asserted her membership in a rather distinguished
secret society to which she and Tom belonged.
Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and
Miss Baker sat at either end of the long couch and she read
aloud to him from the Saturday Evening Postthe words,
murmurous and uninflected, running together in a soothing
tune. The lamp-light, bright on his boots and dull on
the autumn-leaf yellow of her hair, glinted along the paper
as she turned a page with a flutter of slender muscles in her
arms.
When we came in she held us silent for a moment with
a lifted hand.
To be continued, she said, tossing the magazine on the
table, in our very next issue.
Her body asserted itself with a restless movement of her
knee, and she stood up.
Ten oclock, she remarked, apparently finding the time
on the ceiling. Time for this good girl to go to bed.
Jordans going to play in the tournament tomorrow, explained
Daisy, over at Westchester.
Oh,youre JORdan Baker.
I knew now why her face was familiarits pleasing contemptuous
expression had looked out at me from many
rotogravure pictures of the sporting life at Asheville and 
22 The Great Gatsby
Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I had heard some story of her
too, a critical, unpleasant story, but what it was I had forgotten
long ago.
Good night, she said softly. Wake me at eight, wont
you.
If youll get up.
I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon.
Of course you will, confirmed Daisy. In fact I think
Ill arrange a marriage. Come over often, Nick, and Ill sort
ofohfling you together. You knowlock you up accidentally
in linen closets and push you out to sea in a boat,
and all that sort of thing
Good night, called Miss Baker from the stairs. I havent
heard a word.
Shes a nice girl, said Tom after a moment. They oughtnt
to let her run around the country this way.
Who oughtnt to? inquired Daisy coldly.
Her family.
Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides,
Nicks going to look after her, arent you, Nick? Shes
going to spend lots of week-ends out here this summer. I
think the home influence will be very good for her.
Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment in silence.
Is she from New York? I asked quickly.
From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together
there. Our beautiful white
Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?
demanded Tom suddenly.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 23
Did I? She looked at me. I cant seem to remember, but I
think we talked about the Nordic race. Yes, Im sure we did.
It sort of crept up on us and first thing you know
Dont believe everything you hear, Nick, he advised
me.
I said lightly that I had heard nothing at all, and a few
minutes later I got up to go home. They came to the door
with me and stood side by side in a cheerful square of light.
As I started my motor Daisy peremptorily called Wait!
I forgot to ask you something, and its important. We
heard you were engaged to a girl out West.
Thats right, corroborated Tom kindly. We heard that
you were engaged.
Its libel. Im too poor.
But we heard it, insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening
up again in a flower-like way. We heard it from three
people so it must be true.
Of course I knew what they were referring to, but I wasnt
even vaguely engaged. The fact that gossip had published
the banns was one of the reasons I had come east. You cant
stop going with an old friend on account of rumors and on
the other hand I had no intention of being rumored into
marriage.
Their interest rather touched me and made them less
remotely richnevertheless, I was confused and a little disgusted
as I drove away. It seemed to me that the thing for
Daisy to do was to rush out of the house, child in armsbut
apparently there were no such intentions in her head. As for
Tom, the fact that he had some woman in New York was 
24 The Great Gatsby
really less surprising than that he had been depressed by a
book. Something was making him nibble at the edge of stale
ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished
his peremptory heart.
Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and
in front of wayside garages, where new red gas-pumps sat
out in pools of light, and when I reached my estate at West
Egg I ran the car under its shed and sat for a while on an
abandoned grass roller in the yard. The wind had blown off,
leaving a loud bright night with wings beating in the trees
and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth
blew the frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavered
across the moonlight and turning my head to watch
it I saw that I was not alonefifty feet away a figure had
emerged from the shadow of my neighbors mansion and
was standing with his hands in his pockets regarding the
silver pepper of the stars. Something in his leisurely movements
and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn
suggested that it was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to determine
what share was his of our local heavens.
I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned him
at dinner, and that would do for an introduction. But I
didnt call to him for he gave a sudden intimation that he
was content to be alonehe stretched out his arms toward
the dark water in a curious way, and far as I was from him I
could have sworn he was trembling. Involuntarily I glanced
seawardand distinguished nothing except a single green
light, minute and far away, that might have been the end of
a dock. When I looked once more for Gatsby he had van-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 25
ished, and I was alone again in the unquiet darkness.
26 The Great Gatsby
Chapter 2
About half way between West Egg and New York the
motor-road hastily joins the railroad and runs beside
it for a quarter of a mile, so as to shrink away from a certain
desolate area of land. This is a valley of ashesa fantastic
farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and hills and
grotesque gardens where ashes take the forms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke and finally, with a transcendent
effort, of men who move dimly and already crumbling
through the powdery air. Occasionally a line of grey cars
crawls along an invisible track, gives out a ghastly creak and
comes to rest, and immediately the ash-grey men swarm up
with leaden spades and stir up an impenetrable cloud which
screens their obscure operations from your sight.
But above the grey land and the spasms of bleak dust
which drift endlessly over it, you perceive, after a moment,
the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg. The eyes of Doctor T. J.
Eckleburg are blue and gigantictheir retinas are one yard
high. They look out of no face but, instead, from a pair of
enormous yellow spectacles which pass over a nonexistent
nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set them there
to fatten his practice in the borough of Queens, and then
sank down himself into eternal blindness or forgot them
and moved away. But his eyes, dimmed a little by many
paintless days under sun and rain, brood on over the sol-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 27
emn dumping ground.
The valley of ashes is bounded on one side by a small foul
river, and when the drawbridge is up to let barges through,
the passengers on waiting trains can stare at the dismal
scene for as long as half an hour. There is always a halt there
of at least a minute and it was because of this that I first met
Tom Buchanans mistress.
The fact that he had one was insisted upon wherever he
was known. His acquaintances resented the fact that he
turned up in popular restaurants with her and, leaving her
at a table, sauntered about, chatting with whomsoever he
knew. Though I was curious to see her I had no desire to
meet herbut I did. I went up to New York with Tom on the
train one afternoon and when we stopped by the ashheaps
he jumped to his feet and taking hold of my elbow literally
forced me from the car.
Were getting off! he insisted. I want you to meet my
girl.
I think hed tanked up a good deal at luncheon and his
determination to have my company bordered on violence.
The supercilious assumption was that on Sunday afternoon
I had nothing better to do.
I followed him over a low white-washed railroad fence
and we walked back a hundred yards along the road under
Doctor Eckleburgs persistent stare. The only building
in sight was a small block of yellow brick sitting on the edge
of the waste land, a sort of compact Main Street ministering
to it and contiguous to absolutely nothing. One of the three
shops it contained was for rent and another was an all-night 
28 The Great Gatsby
restaurant approached by a trail of ashes; the third was a
garageRepairs. GEORGE B. WILSON. Cars Bought and
Soldand I followed Tom inside.
The interior was unprosperous and bare; the only car visible
was the dust-covered wreck of a Ford which crouched
in a dim corner. It had occurred to me that this shadow of
a garage must be a blind and that sumptuous and romantic
apartments were concealed overhead when the proprietor
himself appeared in the door of an office, wiping his hands
on a piece of waste. He was a blonde, spiritless man, anaemic,
and faintly handsome. When he saw us a damp gleam
of hope sprang into his light blue eyes.
Hello, Wilson, old man, said Tom, slapping him jovially
on the shoulder. Hows business?
I cant complain, answered Wilson unconvincingly.
When are you going to sell me that car?
Next week; Ive got my man working on it now.
Works pretty slow, dont he?
No, he doesnt, said Tom coldly. And if you feel that way
about it, maybe Id better sell it somewhere else after all.
I dont mean that, explained Wilson quickly. I just
meant
His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently around
the garage. Then I heard footsteps on a stairs and in a moment
the thickish figure of a woman blocked out the light
from the office door. She was in the middle thirties, and
faintly stout, but she carried her surplus flesh sensuously as
some women can. Her face, above a spotted dress of dark
blue crepe-de-chine, contained no facet or gleam of beauty 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 29
but there was an immediately perceptible vitality about her
as if the nerves of her body were continually smouldering.
She smiled slowly and walking through her husband as if he
were a ghost shook hands with Tom, looking him flush in
the eye. Then she wet her lips and without turning around
spoke to her husband in a soft, coarse voice:
Get some chairs, why dont you, so somebody can sit
down.
Oh, sure, agreed Wilson hurriedly and went toward the
little office, mingling immediately with the cement color of
the walls. A white ashen dust veiled his dark suit and his
pale hair as it veiled everything in the vicinityexcept his
wife, who moved close to Tom.
I want to see you, said Tom intently. Get on the next
train.
All right.
Ill meet you by the news-stand on the lower level.
She nodded and moved away from him just as George
Wilson emerged with two chairs from his office door.
We waited for her down the road and out of sight. It was
a few days before the Fourth of July, and a grey, scrawny
Italian child was setting torpedoes in a row along the railroad
track.
Terrible place, isnt it, said Tom, exchanging a frown
with Doctor Eckleburg.
Awful.
It does her good to get away.
Doesnt her husband object?
Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister in New 
30 The Great Gatsby
York. Hes so dumb he doesnt know hes alive.
So Tom Buchanan and his girl and I went up together
to New Yorkor not quite together, for Mrs. Wilson
sat discreetly in another car. Tom deferred that much to
the sensibilities of those East Eggers who might be on the
train.
She had changed her dress to a brown figured muslin
which stretched tight over her rather wide hips as Tom
helped her to the platform in New York. At the news-stand
she bought a copy of Town Tattle and a moving-picture
magazine and, in the station drug store, some cold cream
and a small flask of perfume. Upstairs, in the solemn echoing
drive she let four taxi cabs drive away before she selected
a new one, lavender-colored with grey upholstery, and in
this we slid out from the mass of the station into the glowing
sunshine. But immediately she turned sharply from the
window and leaning forward tapped on the front glass.
I want to get one of those dogs, she said earnestly. I
want to get one for the apartment. Theyre nice to havea
dog.
We backed up to a grey old man who bore an absurd resemblance
to John D. Rockefeller. In a basket, swung from
his neck, cowered a dozen very recent puppies of an indeterminate
breed.
What kind are they? asked Mrs. Wilson eagerly as he
came to the taxi-window.
All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?
Id like to get one of those police dogs; I dont suppose
you got that kind?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 31
The man peered doubtfully into the basket, plunged in
his hand and drew one up, wriggling, by the back of the
neck.
Thats no police dog, said Tom.
No, its not exactly a polICE dog, said the man with
disappointment in his voice. Its more of an airedale. He
passed his hand over the brown wash-rag of a back. Look
at that coat. Some coat. Thats a dog thatll never bother you
with catching cold.
I think its cute, said Mrs. Wilson enthusiastically. How
much is it?
That dog? He looked at it admiringly. That dog will cost
you ten dollars.
The airedaleundoubtedly there was an airedale concerned
in it somewhere though its feet were startlingly
whitechanged hands and settled down into Mrs. Wilsons
lap, where she fondled the weather-proof coat with rapture.
Is it a boy or a girl? she asked delicately.
That dog? That dogs a boy.
Its a bitch, said Tom decisively. Heres your money. Go
and buy ten more dogs with it.
We drove over to Fifth Avenue, so warm and soft, almost
pastoral, on the summer Sunday afternoon that I wouldnt
have been surprised to see a great flock of white sheep turn
the corner.
Hold on, I said, I have to leave you here.
No, you dont, interposed Tom quickly. Myrtlell be
hurt if you dont come up to the apartment. Wont you,
Myrtle?
32 The Great Gatsby
Come on, she urged. Ill telephone my sister Catherine.
Shes said to be very beautiful by people who ought
to know.
Well, Id like to, but
We went on, cutting back again over the Park toward the
West Hundreds. At 158th Street the cab stopped at one slice
in a long white cake of apartment houses. Throwing a regal
homecoming glance around the neighborhood, Mrs. Wilson
gathered up her dog and her other purchases and went
haughtily in.
Im going to have the McKees come up, she announced
as we rose in the elevator. And of course I got to call up my
sister, too.
The apartment was on the top floora small living
room, a small dining room, a small bedroom and a bath.
The living room was crowded to the doors with a set of tapestried
furniture entirely too large for it so that to move
about was to stumble continually over scenes of ladies
swinging in the gardens of Versailles. The only picture was
an over-enlarged photograph, apparently a hen sitting on
a blurred rock. Looked at from a distance however the hen
resolved itself into a bonnet and the countenance of a stout
old lady beamed down into the room. Several old copies of
Town Tattle lay on the table together with a copy of Simon
Called Peter and some of the small scandal magazines of
Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was first concerned with the dog. A
reluctant elevator boy went for a box full of straw and some
milk to which he added on his own initiative a tin of large
hard dog biscuitsone of which decomposed apathetically 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 33
in the saucer of milk all afternoon. Meanwhile Tom brought
out a bottle of whiskey from a locked bureau door.
I have been drunk just twice in my life and the second
time was that afternoon so everything that happened has a
dim hazy cast over it although until after eight oclock the
apartment was full of cheerful sun. Sitting on Toms lap
Mrs. Wilson called up several people on the telephone; then
there were no cigarettes and I went out to buy some at the
drug store on the corner. When I came back they had disappeared
so I sat down discreetly in the living room and read
a chapter of Simon Called Petereither it was terrible stuff
or the whiskey distorted things because it didnt make any
sense to me.
Just as Tom and Myrtleafter the first drink Mrs. Wilson
and I called each other by our first namesreappeared,
company commenced to arrive at the apartment door.
The sister, Catherine, was a slender, worldly girl of about
thirty with a solid sticky bob of red hair and a complexion
powdered milky white. Her eyebrows had been plucked and
then drawn on again at a more rakish angle but the efforts
of nature toward the restoration of the old alignment gave
a blurred air to her face. When she moved about there was
an incessant clicking as innumerable pottery bracelets jingled
up and down upon her arms. She came in with such a
proprietary haste and looked around so possessively at the
furniture that I wondered if she lived here. But when I asked
her she laughed immoderately, repeated my question aloud
and told me she lived with a girl friend at a hotel.
Mr. McKee was a pale feminine man from the flat below. 
34 The Great Gatsby
He had just shaved for there was a white spot of lather on
his cheekbone and he was most respectful in his greeting to
everyone in the room. He informed me that he was in the
artistic game and I gathered later that he was a photographer
and had made the dim enlargement of Mrs. Wilsons
mother which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall. His
wife was shrill, languid, handsome and horrible. She told
me with pride that her husband had photographed her a
hundred and twenty-seven times since they had been married.
Mrs. Wilson had changed her costume some time before
and was now attired in an elaborate afternoon dress of
cream colored chiffon, which gave out a continual rustle as
she swept about the room. With the influence of the dress
her personality had also undergone a change. The intense
vitality that had been so remarkable in the garage was converted
into impressive hauteur. Her laughter, her gestures,
her assertions became more violently affected moment by
moment and as she expanded the room grew smaller around
her until she seemed to be revolving on a noisy, creaking
pivot through the smoky air.
My dear, she told her sister in a high mincing shout,
most of these fellas will cheat you every time. All they think
of is money. I had a woman up here last week to look at my
feet and when she gave me the bill youd of thought she had
my appendicitus out.
What was the name of the woman? asked Mrs. McKee.
Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking at peoples feet
in their own homes.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 35
I like your dress, remarked Mrs. McKee, I think its
adorable.
Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising her eyebrow
in disdain.
Its just a crazy old thing, she said. I just slip it on sometimes
when I dont care what I look like.
But it looks wonderful on you, if you know what I mean,
pursued Mrs. McKee. If Chester could only get you in that
pose I think he could make something of it.
We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson who removed a
strand of hair from over her eyes and looked back at us with
a brilliant smile. Mr. McKee regarded her intently with his
head on one side and then moved his hand back and forth
slowly in front of his face.
I should change the light, he said after a moment. Id
like to bring out the modelling of the features. And Id try
to get hold of all the back hair.
I wouldnt think of changing the light, cried Mrs. McKee.
I think its
Her husband said SH! and we all looked at the subject
again whereupon Tom Buchanan yawned audibly and got
to his feet.
You McKees have something to drink, he said. Get
some more ice and mineral water, Myrtle, before everybody
goes to sleep.
I told that boy about the ice. Myrtle raised her eyebrows
in despair at the shiftlessness of the lower orders. These
people! You have to keep after them all the time.
She looked at me and laughed pointlessly. Then she 
36 The Great Gatsby
flounced over to the dog, kissed it with ecstasy and swept
into the kitchen, implying that a dozen chefs awaited her
orders there.
Ive done some nice things out on Long Island, asserted
Mr. McKee.
Tom looked at him blankly.
Two of them we have framed downstairs.
Two what? demanded Tom.
Two studies. One of them I call Montauk Pointthe
Gulls, and the other I call Montauk Pointthe Sea. 
The sister Catherine sat down beside me on the couch.
Do you live down on Long Island, too? she inquired.
I live at West Egg.
Really? I was down there at a party about a month ago.
At a man named Gatsbys. Do you know him?
I live next door to him.
Well, they say hes a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelms.
Thats where all his money comes from.
Really?
She nodded.
Im scared of him. Id hate to have him get anything on
me.
This absorbing information about my neighbor was interrupted
by Mrs. McKees pointing suddenly at Catherine:
Chester, I think you could do something with HER, she
broke out, but Mr. McKee only nodded in a bored way and
turned his attention to Tom.
Id like to do more work on Long Island if I could get the
entry. All I ask is that they should give me a start.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 37
Ask Myrtle, said Tom, breaking into a short shout of
laughter as Mrs. Wilson entered with a tray. Shell give you
a letter of introduction, wont you, Myrtle?
Do what? she asked, startled.
Youll give McKee a letter of introduction to your husband,
so he can do some studies of him. His lips moved
silently for a moment as he invented.  George B. Wilson at
the Gasoline Pump, or something like that.
Catherine leaned close to me and whispered in my ear:
Neither of them can stand the person theyre married to.
Cant they?
Cant STAND them. She looked at Myrtle and then at
Tom. What I say is, why go on living with them if they cant
stand them? If I was them Id get a divorce and get married
to each other right away.
Doesnt she like Wilson either?
The answer to this was unexpected. It came from Myrtle
who had overheard the question and it was violent and obscene.
You see? cried Catherine triumphantly. She lowered her
voice again. Its really his wife thats keeping them apart.
Shes a Catholic and they dont believe in divorce.
Daisy was not a Catholic and I was a little shocked at the
elaborateness of the lie.
When they do get married, continued Catherine,
theyre going west to live for a while until it blows over.
Itd be more discreet to go to Europe.
Oh, do you like Europe? she exclaimed surprisingly. I
just got back from Monte Carlo.
38 The Great Gatsby
Really.
Just last year. I went over there with another girl.
Stay long?
No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back. We went
by way of Marseilles. We had over twelve hundred dollars
when we started but we got gypped out of it all in two days
in the private rooms. We had an awful time getting back, I
can tell you. God, how I hated that town!
The late afternoon sky bloomed in the window for a moment
like the blue honey of the Mediterraneanthen the
shrill voice of Mrs. McKee called me back into the room.
I almost made a mistake, too, she declared vigorously. I
almost married a little kyke whod been after me for years.
I knew he was below me. Everybody kept saying to me: Lucille,
that mans way below you! But if I hadnt met Chester,
hed of got me sure.
Yes, but listen, said Myrtle Wilson, nodding her head
up and down, at least you didnt marry him.
I know I didnt.
Well, I married him, said Myrtle, ambiguously. And
thats the difference between your case and mine.
Why did you, Myrtle? demanded Catherine. Nobody
forced you to.
Myrtle considered.
I married him because I thought he was a gentleman,
she said finally. I thought he knew something about breeding,
but he wasnt fit to lick my shoe.
You were crazy about him for a while, said Catherine.
Crazy about him! cried Myrtle incredulously. Who said 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 39
I was crazy about him? I never was any more crazy about
him than I was about that man there.
She pointed suddenly at me, and every one looked at
me accusingly. I tried to show by my expression that I had
played no part in her past.
The only CRAZY I was was when I married him. I knew
right away I made a mistake. He borrowed somebodys best
suit to get married in and never even told me about it, and
the man came after it one day when he was out. She looked
around to see who was listening:  Oh, is that your suit? I
said. This is the first I ever heard about it. But I gave it to
him and then I lay down and cried to beat the band all afternoon.
She really ought to get away from him, resumed Catherine
to me. Theyve been living over that garage for eleven
years. And Toms the first sweetie she ever had.
The bottle of whiskeya second onewas now in constant
demand by all present, excepting Catherine who felt
just as good on nothing at all. Tom rang for the janitor
and sent him for some celebrated sandwiches, which were
a complete supper in themselves. I wanted to get out and
walk eastward toward the park through the soft twilight but
each time I tried to go I became entangled in some wild strident
argument which pulled me back, as if with ropes, into
my chair. Yet high over the city our line of yellow windows
must have contributed their share of human secrecy to the
casual watcher in the darkening streets, and I was him too,
looking up and wondering. I was within and without, simultaneously
enchanted and repelled by the inexhaustible 
40 The Great Gatsby
variety of life.
Myrtle pulled her chair close to mine, and suddenly her
warm breath poured over me the story of her first meeting
with Tom.
It was on the two little seats facing each other that are
always the last ones left on the train. I was going up to New
York to see my sister and spend the night. He had on a dress
suit and patent leather shoes and I couldnt keep my eyes off
him but every time he looked at me I had to pretend to be
looking at the advertisement over his head. When we came
into the station he was next to me and his white shirt-front
pressed against my armand so I told him Id have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when
I got into a taxi with him I didnt hardly know I wasnt getting
into a subway train. All I kept thinking about, over and
over, was You cant live forever, you cant live forever. 
She turned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang full of her
artificial laughter.
My dear, she cried, Im going to give you this dress as
soon as Im through with it. Ive got to get another one tomorrow.
Im going to make a list of all the things Ive got to
get. A massage and a wave and a collar for the dog and one
of those cute little ash-trays where you touch a spring, and
a wreath with a black silk bow for mothers grave thatll last
all summer. I got to write down a list so I wont forget all the
things I got to do.
It was nine oclockalmost immediately afterward I
looked at my watch and found it was ten. Mr. McKee was
asleep on a chair with his fists clenched in his lap, like a 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 41
photograph of a man of action. Taking out my handkerchief
I wiped from his cheek the remains of the spot of dried lather
that had worried me all the afternoon.
The little dog was sitting on the table looking with blind
eyes through the smoke and from time to time groaning
faintly. People disappeared, reappeared, made plans to go
somewhere, and then lost each other, searched for each
other, found each other a few feet away. Some time toward
midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson stood face to
face discussing in impassioned voices whether Mrs. Wilson
had any right to mention Daisys name.
Daisy! Daisy! Daisy! shouted Mrs. Wilson. Ill say it
whenever I want to! Daisy! Dai
Making a short deft movement Tom Buchanan broke her
nose with his open hand.
Then there were bloody towels upon the bathroom floor,
and womens voices scolding, and high over the confusion
a long broken wail of pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze
and started in a daze toward the door. When he had gone
half way he turned around and stared at the scenehis wife
and Catherine scolding and consoling as they stumbled
here and there among the crowded furniture with articles
of aid, and the despairing figure on the couch bleeding fluently
and trying to spread a copy of Town Tattle over the
tapestry scenes of Versailles. Then Mr. McKee turned and
continued on out the door. Taking my hat from the chandelier
I followed.
Come to lunch some day, he suggested, as we groaned
down in the elevator.
42 The Great Gatsby
Where?
Anywhere.
Keep your hands off the lever, snapped the elevator
boy.
I beg your pardon, said Mr. McKee with dignity, I didnt
know I was touching it.
All right, I agreed, Ill be glad to.
 I was standing beside his bed and he was sitting up
between the sheets, clad in his underwear, with a great
portfolio in his hands.
Beauty and the Beast  Loneliness  Old Grocery
Horse  Brookn Bridge .
Then I was lying half asleep in the cold lower level of the
Pennsylvania Station, staring at the morning Tribune and
waiting for the four oclock train.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 43
Chapter 3
There was music from my neighbors house through the
summer nights. In his blue gardens men and girls came
and went like moths among the whisperings and the champagne
and the stars. At high tide in the afternoon I watched
his guests diving from the tower of his raft or taking the
sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two motor-boats
slit the waters of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts
of foam. On week-ends his Rolls-Royce became an
omnibus, bearing parties to and from the city, between
nine in the morning and long past midnight, while his station
wagon scampered like a brisk yellow bug to meet all
trains. And on Mondays eight servants including an extra
gardener toiled all day with mops and scrubbing-brushes
and hammers and garden-shears, repairing the ravages of
the night before.
Every Friday five crates of oranges and lemons arrived
from a fruiterer in New Yorkevery Monday these same
oranges and lemons left his back door in a pyramid of pulpless
halves. There was a machine in the kitchen which could
extract the juice of two hundred oranges in half an hour, if
a little button was pressed two hundred times by a butlers
thumb.
At least once a fortnight a corps of caterers came down
with several hundred feet of canvas and enough colored 
44 The Great Gatsby
lights to make a Christmas tree of Gatsbys enormous
garden. On buffet tables, garnished with glistening horsdoeuvre,
spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
harlequin designs and pastry pigs and turkeys bewitched to
a dark gold. In the main hall a bar with a real brass rail was
set up, and stocked with gins and liquors and with cordials
so long forgotten that most of his female guests were too
young to know one from another.
By seven oclock the orchestra has arrivedno thin fivepiece
affair but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and
saxophones and viols and cornets and piccolos and low and
high drums. The last swimmers have come in from the beach
now and are dressing upstairs; the cars from New York are
parked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and salons
and verandas are gaudy with primary colors and hair
shorn in strange new ways and shawls beyond the dreams
of Castile. The bar is in full swing and floating rounds of
cocktails permeate the garden outside until the air is alive
with chatter and laughter and casual innuendo and introductions
forgotten on the spot and enthusiastic meetings
between women who never knew each others names.
The lights grow brighter as the earth lurches away from
the sun and now the orchestra is playing yellow cocktail
music and the opera of voices pitches a key higher. Laughter
is easier, minute by minute, spilled with prodigality, tipped
out at a cheerful word. The groups change more swiftly,
swell with new arrivals, dissolve and form in the same
breathalready there are wanderers, confident girls who
weave here and there among the stouter and more stable, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 45
become for a sharp, joyous moment the center of a group
and then excited with triumph glide on through the seachange
of faces and voices and color under the constantly
changing light.
Suddenly one of these gypsies in trembling opal, seizes a
cocktail out of the air, dumps it down for courage and moving
her hands like Frisco dances out alone on the canvas
platform. A momentary hush; the orchestra leader varies
his rhythm obligingly for her and there is a burst of chatter
as the erroneous news goes around that she is Gilda Grays
understudy from the Follies. The party has begun.
I believe that on the first night I went to Gatsbys house
I was one of the few guests who had actually been invited.
People were not invitedthey went there. They got into
automobiles which bore them out to Long Island and somehow
they ended up at Gatsbys door. Once there they were
introduced by somebody who knew Gatsby and after that
they conducted themselves according to the rules of behavior
associated with amusement parks. Sometimes they
came and went without having met Gatsby at all, came for
the party with a simplicity of heart that was its own ticket
of admission.
I had been actually invited. A chauffeur in a uniform of
robins egg blue crossed my lawn early that Saturday morning
with a surprisingly formal note from his employerthe
honor would be entirely Gatsbys, it said, if I would attend
his little party that night. He had seen me several times
and had intended to call on me long before but a peculiar
combination of circumstances had prevented itsigned Jay 
46 The Great Gatsby
Gatsby in a majestic hand.
Dressed up in white flannels I went over to his lawn a
little after seven and wandered around rather ill-at-ease
among swirls and eddies of people I didnt knowthough
here and there was a face I had noticed on the commuting
train. I was immediately struck by the number of young
Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a little
hungry and all talking in low earnest voices to solid and
prosperous Americans. I was sure that they were selling
something: bonds or insurance or automobiles. They were,
at least, agonizingly aware of the easy money in the vicinity
and convinced that it was theirs for a few words in the
right key.
As soon as I arrived I made an attempt to find my host
but the two or three people of whom I asked his whereabouts
stared at me in such an amazed way and denied so
vehemently any knowledge of his movements that I slunk
off in the direction of the cocktail tablethe only place in
the garden where a single man could linger without looking
purposeless and alone.
I was on my way to get roaring drunk from sheer embarrassment
when Jordan Baker came out of the house and
stood at the head of the marble steps, leaning a little backward
and looking with contemptuous interest down into
the garden.
Welcome or not, I found it necessary to attach myself to
someone before I should begin to address cordial remarks
to the passers-by.
Hello! I roared, advancing toward her. My voice seemed 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 47
unnaturally loud across the garden.
I thought you might be here, she responded absently as I
came up. I remembered you lived next door to
She held my hand impersonally, as a promise that shed
take care of me in a minute, and gave ear to two girls in twin
yellow dresses who stopped at the foot of the steps.
Hello! they cried together. Sorry you didnt win.
That was for the golf tournament. She had lost in the finals
the week before.
You dont know who we are, said one of the girls in yellow,
but we met you here about a month ago.
Youve dyed your hair since then, remarked Jordan, and
I started but the girls had moved casually on and her remark
was addressed to the premature moon, produced like
the supper, no doubt, out of a caterers basket. With Jordans
slender golden arm resting in mine we descended the steps
and sauntered about the garden. A tray of cocktails floated
at us through the twilight and we sat down at a table with
the two girls in yellow and three men, each one introduced
to us as Mr. Mumble.
Do you come to these parties often? inquired Jordan of
the girl beside her.
The last one was the one I met you at, answered the girl,
in an alert, confident voice. She turned to her companion:
Wasnt it for you, Lucille?
It was for Lucille, too.
I like to come, Lucille said. I never care what I do, so
I always have a good time. When I was here last I tore my
gown on a chair, and he asked me my name and address
48 The Great Gatsby
inside of a week I got a package from Croiriers with a new
evening gown in it.
Did you keep it? asked Jordan.
Sure I did. I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too
big in the bust and had to be altered. It was gas blue with
lavender beads. Two hundred and sixty-five dollars.
Theres something funny about a fellow thatll do a thing
like that, said the other girl eagerly. He doesnt want any
trouble with ANYbody.
Who doesnt? I inquired.
Gatsby. Somebody told me
The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.
Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once.
A thrill passed over all of us. The three Mr. Mumbles
bent forward and listened eagerly.
I dont think its so much THAT, argued Lucille skeptically;
its more that he was a German spy during the war.
One of the men nodded in confirmation.
I heard that from a man who knew all about him, grew
up with him in Germany, he assured us positively.
Oh, no, said the first girl, it couldnt be that, because he
was in the American army during the war. As our credulity
switched back to her she leaned forward with enthusiasm.
You look at him sometimes when he thinks nobodys looking
at him. Ill bet he killed a man.
She narrowed her eyes and shivered. Lucille shivered.
We all turned and looked around for Gatsby. It was testimony
to the romantic speculation he inspired that there were
whispers about him from those who found little that it was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 49
necessary to whisper about in this world.
The first supperthere would be another one after midnightwas
now being served, and Jordan invited me to join
her own party who were spread around a table on the other
side of the garden. There were three married couples and
Jordans escort, a persistent undergraduate given to violent
innuendo and obviously under the impression that sooner
or later Jordan was going to yield him up her person to a
greater or lesser degree. Instead of rambling this party had
preserved a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself the
function of representing the staid nobility of the countrysideEast
Egg condescending to West Egg, and carefully
on guard against its spectroscopic gayety.
Lets get out, whispered Jordan, after a somehow wasteful
and inappropriate half hour. This is much too polite for
me.
We got up, and she explained that we were going to find
the hostI had never met him, she said, and it was making
me uneasy. The undergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy
way.
The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded but Gatsby
was not there. She couldnt find him from the top of the
steps, and he wasnt on the veranda. On a chance we tried
an important-looking door, and walked into a high Gothic
library, panelled with carved English oak, and probably
transported complete from some ruin overseas.
A stout, middle-aged man with enormous owl-eyed spectacles
was sitting somewhat drunk on the edge of a great
table, staring with unsteady concentration at the shelves of 
50 The Great Gatsby
books. As we entered he wheeled excitedly around and examined
Jordan from head to foot.
What do you think? he demanded impetuously.
About what?
He waved his hand toward the book-shelves.
About that. As a matter of fact you neednt bother to ascertain.
I ascertained. Theyre real.
The books?
He nodded.
Absolutely realhave pages and everything. I thought
theyd be a nice durable cardboard. Matter of fact, theyre
absolutely real. Pages andHere! Lemme show you.
Taking our skepticism for granted, he rushed to the
bookcases and returned with Volume One of the Stoddard
Lectures.
See! he cried triumphantly. Its a bona fide piece of
printed matter. It fooled me. This fellas a regular Belasco.
Its a triumph. What thoroughness! What realism! Knew
when to stop toodidnt cut the pages. But what do you
want? What do you expect?
He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on
its shelf muttering that if one brick was removed the whole
library was liable to collapse.
Who brought you? he demanded. Or did you just come?
I was brought. Most people were brought.
Jordan looked at him alertly, cheerfully without answering.
I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt, he continued.
Mrs. Claud Roosevelt. Do you know her? I met her 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 51
somewhere last night. Ive been drunk for about a week now,
and I thought it might sober me up to sit in a library.
Has it?
A little bit, I think. I cant tell yet. Ive only been here an
hour. Did I tell you about the books? Theyre real. Theyre

You told us.
We shook hands with him gravely and went back outdoors.
There was dancing now on the canvas in the garden,
old men pushing young girls backward in eternal graceless
circles, superior couples holding each other tortuously,
fashionably and keeping in the cornersand a great number
of single girls dancing individualistically or relieving
the orchestra for a moment of the burden of the banjo or the
traps. By midnight the hilarity had increased. A celebrated
tenor had sung in Italian and a notorious contralto had sung
in jazz and between the numbers people were doing stunts
all over the garden, while happy vacuous bursts of laughter
rose toward the summer sky. A pair of stage twinswho
turned out to be the girls in yellowdid a baby act in costume
and champagne was served in glasses bigger than
finger bowls. The moon had risen higher, and floating in the
Sound was a triangle of silver scales, trembling a little to the
stiff, tinny drip of the banjoes on the lawn.
I was still with Jordan Baker. We were sitting at a table
with a man of about my age and a rowdy little girl who gave
way upon the slightest provocation to uncontrollable laughter.
I was enjoying myself now. I had taken two finger bowls 
52 The Great Gatsby
of champagne and the scene had changed before my eyes
into something significant, elemental and profound.
At a lull in the entertainment the man looked at me and
smiled.
Your face is familiar, he said, politely. Werent you in
the Third Division during the war?
Why, yes. I was in the Ninth Machine-Gun Battalion.
I was in the Seventh Infantry until June nineteen-eighteen.
I knew Id seen you somewhere before.
We talked for a moment about some wet, grey little villages
in France. Evidently he lived in this vicinity for he told
me that he had just bought a hydroplane and was going to
try it out in the morning.
Want to go with me, old sport? Just near the shore along
the Sound.
What time?
Any time that suits you best.
It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his name when Jordan
looked around and smiled.
Having a gay time now? she inquired.
Much better. I turned again to my new acquaintance.
This is an unusual party for me. I havent even seen the
host. I live over there I waved my hand at the invisible
hedge in the distance, and this man Gatsby sent over his
chauffeur with an invitation.
For a moment he looked at me as if he failed to understand.
Im Gatsby, he said suddenly.
What! I exclaimed. Oh, I beg your pardon.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 53
I thought you knew, old sport. Im afraid Im not a very
good host.
He smiled understandinglymuch more than understandingly.
It was one of those rare smiles with a quality of
eternal reassurance in it, that you may come across four or
five times in life. It facedor seemed to facethe whole external
world for an instant, and then concentrated on YOU
with an irresistible prejudice in your favor. It understood
you just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed
in you as you would like to believe in yourself and assured
you that it had precisely the impression of you that, at your
best, you hoped to convey. Precisely at that point it vanishedand
I was looking at an elegant young rough-neck, a
year or two over thirty, whose elaborate formality of speech
just missed being absurd. Some time before he introduced
himself Id got a strong impression that he was picking his
words with care.
Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified himself
a butler hurried toward him with the information that
Chicago was calling him on the wire. He excused himself
with a small bow that included each of us in turn.
If you want anything just ask for it, old sport, he urged
me. Excuse me. I will rejoin you later.
When he was gone I turned immediately to Jordan
constrained to assure her of my surprise. I had expected
that Mr. Gatsby would be a florid and corpulent person in
his middle years.
Who is he? I demanded. Do you know?
Hes just a man named Gatsby.
54 The Great Gatsby
Where is he from, I mean? And what does he do?
Now YOUre started on the subject, she answered with
a wan smile. Well,he told me once he was an Oxford
man.
A dim background started to take shape behind him but
at her next remark it faded away.
However, I dont believe it.
Why not?
I dont know, she insisted, I just dont think he went
there.
Something in her tone reminded me of the other girls I
think he killed a man, and had the effect of stimulating my
curiosity. I would have accepted without question the information
that Gatsby sprang from the swamps of Louisiana
or from the lower East Side of New York. That was comprehensible.
But young men didntat least in my provincial
inexperience I believed they didntdrift coolly out of nowhere
and buy a palace on Long Island Sound.
Anyhow he gives large parties, said Jordan, changing
the subject with an urbane distaste for the concrete. And I
like large parties. Theyre so intimate. At small parties there
isnt any privacy.
There was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the
orchestra leader rang out suddenly above the echolalia of
the garden.
Ladies and gentlemen, he cried. At the request of Mr.
Gatsby we are going to play for you Mr. Vladimir Tostoffs
latest work which attracted so much attention at Carnegie
Hall last May. If you read the papers you know there was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 55
a big sensation. He smiled with jovial condescension and
added Some sensation! whereupon everybody laughed.
The piece is known, he concluded lustily, as Vladimir
Tostoffs Jazz History of the World. 
The nature of Mr. Tostoffs composition eluded me, because
just as it began my eyes fell on Gatsby, standing alone
on the marble steps and looking from one group to another
with approving eyes. His tanned skin was drawn attractively
tight on his face and his short hair looked as though it
were trimmed every day. I could see nothing sinister about
him. I wondered if the fact that he was not drinking helped
to set him off from his guests, for it seemed to me that he
grew more correct as the fraternal hilarity increased. When
the Jazz History of the World was over girls were putting
their heads on mens shoulders in a puppyish, convivial
way, girls were swooning backward playfully into mens
arms, even into groups knowing that some one would arrest
their fallsbut no one swooned backward on Gatsby
and no French bob touched Gatsbys shoulder and no singing
quartets were formed with Gatsbys head for one link.
I beg your pardon.
Gatsbys butler was suddenly standing beside us.
Miss Baker? he inquired. I beg your pardon but Mr.
Gatsby would like to speak to you alone.
With me? she exclaimed in surprise.
Yes, madame.
She got up slowly, raising her eyebrows at me in astonishment,
and followed the butler toward the house. I noticed
that she wore her evening dress, all her dresses, like sports 
56 The Great Gatsby
clothesthere was a jauntiness about her movements as if
she had first learned to walk upon golf courses on clean,
crisp mornings.
I was alone and it was almost two. For some time confused
and intriguing sounds had issued from a long many-windowed
room which overhung the terrace. Eluding Jordans
undergraduate who was now engaged in an obstetrical conversation
with two chorus girls, and who implored me to
join him, I went inside.
The large room was full of people. One of the girls in
yellow was playing the piano and beside her stood a tall,
red haired young lady from a famous chorus, engaged in
song. She had drunk a quantity of champagne and during
the course of her song she had decided ineptly that everything
was very very sadshe was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Whenever there was a pause in the song she
filled it with gasping broken sobs and then took up the lyric
again in a quavering soprano. The tears coursed down
her cheeksnot freely, however, for when they came into
contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes they assumed an
inky color, and pursued the rest of their way in slow black
rivulets. A humorous suggestion was made that she sing the
notes on her face whereupon she threw up her hands, sank
into a chair and went off into a deep vinous sleep.
She had a fight with a man who says hes her husband,
explained a girl at my elbow.
I looked around. Most of the remaining women were
now having fights with men said to be their husbands. Even
Jordans party, the quartet from East Egg, were rent asun-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 57
der by dissension. One of the men was talking with curious
intensity to a young actress, and his wife after attempting
to laugh at the situation in a dignified and indifferent
way broke down entirely and resorted to flank attacksat
intervals she appeared suddenly at his side like an angry
diamond, and hissed You promised! into his ear.
The reluctance to go home was not confined to wayward
men. The hall was at present occupied by two deplorably sober
men and their highly indignant wives. The wives were
sympathizing with each other in slightly raised voices.
Whenever he sees Im having a good time he wants to
go home.
Never heard anything so selfish in my life.
Were always the first ones to leave.
So are we.
Well, were almost the last tonight, said one of the men
sheepishly. The orchestra left half an hour ago.
In spite of the wives agreement that such malevolence
was beyond credibility, the dispute ended in a short struggle,
and both wives were lifted kicking into the night.
As I waited for my hat in the hall the door of the library
opened and Jordan Baker and Gatsby came out together.
He was saying some last word to her but the eagerness in his
manner tightened abruptly into formality as several people
approached him to say goodbye.
Jordans party were calling impatiently to her from the
porch but she lingered for a moment to shake hands.
Ive just heard the most amazing thing, she whispered.
How long were we in there?
58 The Great Gatsby
Why,about an hour.
It wassimply amazing, she repeated abstractedly. But
I swore I wouldnt tell it and here I am tantalizing you. She
yawned gracefully in my face. Please come and see me.
Phone book. Under the name of Mrs. Sigourney Howard.
My aunt. She was hurrying off as she talkedher
brown hand waved a jaunty salute as she melted into her
party at the door.
Rather ashamed that on my first appearance I had stayed
so late, I joined the last of Gatsbys guests who were clustered
around him. I wanted to explain that Id hunted for
him early in the evening and to apologize for not having
known him in the garden.
Dont mention it, he enjoined me eagerly. Dont give it
another thought, old sport. The familiar expression held no
more familiarity than the hand which reassuringly brushed
my shoulder. And dont forget were going up in the hydroplane
tomorrow morning at nine oclock.
Then the butler, behind his shoulder:
Philadelphia wants you on the phone, sir.
All right, in a minute. Tell them Ill be right there.
good night.
Good night.
Good night. He smiledand suddenly there seemed
to be a pleasant significance in having been among the last
to go, as if he had desired it all the time. Good night, old
sport. Good night.
But as I walked down the steps I saw that the evening was
not quite over. Fifty feet from the door a dozen headlights 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 59
illuminated a bizarre and tumultuous scene. In the ditch beside
the road, right side up but violently shorn of one wheel,
rested a new coup which had left Gatsbys drive not two
minutes before. The sharp jut of a wall accounted for the detachment
of the wheel which was now getting considerable
attention from half a dozen curious chauffeurs. However, as
they had left their cars blocking the road a harsh discordant
din from those in the rear had been audible for some time
and added to the already violent confusion of the scene.
A man in a long duster had dismounted from the wreck
and now stood in the middle of the road, looking from the
car to the tire and from the tire to the observers in a pleasant,
puzzled way.
See! he explained. It went in the ditch.
The fact was infinitely astonishing to himand I recognized
first the unusual quality of wonder and then the
manit was the late patron of Gatsbys library.
Howd it happen?
He shrugged his shoulders.
I know nothing whatever about mechanics, he said decisively.
But how did it happen? Did you run into the wall?
Dont ask me, said Owl Eyes, washing his hands of the
whole matter. I know very little about drivingnext to
nothing. It happened, and thats all I know.
Well, if youre a poor driver you oughtnt to try driving
at night.
But I wasnt even trying, he explained indignantly, I
wasnt even trying.
60 The Great Gatsby
An awed hush fell upon the bystanders.
Do you want to commit suicide?
Youre lucky it was just a wheel! A bad driver and not
even TRYing!
You dont understand, explained the criminal. I wasnt
driving. Theres another man in the car.
The shock that followed this declaration found voice in
a sustained Ah-h-h! as the door of the coup swung slowly
open. The crowdit was now a crowdstepped back involuntarily
and when the door had opened wide there was
a ghostly pause. Then, very gradually, part by part, a pale
dangling individual stepped out of the wreck, pawing tentatively
at the ground with a large uncertain dancing shoe.
Blinded by the glare of the headlights and confused by
the incessant groaning of the horns the apparition stood
swaying for a moment before he perceived the man in the
duster.
Whas matter? he inquired calmly. Did we run outa
gas?
Look!
Half a dozen fingers pointed at the amputated wheelhe
stared at it for a moment and then looked upward as though
he suspected that it had dropped from the sky.
It came off, some one explained.
He nodded.
At first I din notice wed stopped.
A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening
his shoulders he remarked in a determined voice:
Wonderff tell me where theres a gasline station?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 61
At least a dozen men, some of them little better off than
he was, explained to him that wheel and car were no longer
joined by any physical bond.
Back out, he suggested after a moment. Put her in reverse.
But the WHEELS off!
He hesitated.
No harm in trying, he said.
The caterwauling horns had reached a crescendo and I
turned away and cut across the lawn toward home. I glanced
back once. A wafer of a moon was shining over Gatsbys
house, making the night fine as before and surviving the
laughter and the sound of his still glowing garden. A sudden
emptiness seemed to flow now from the windows and
the great doors, endowing with complete isolation the figure
of the host who stood on the porch, his hand up in a
formal gesture of farewell.
Reading over what I have written so far I see I have given
the impression that the events of three nights several weeks
apart were all that absorbed me. On the contrary they were
merely casual events in a crowded summer and, until much
later, they absorbed me infinitely less than my personal affairs.
Most of the time I worked. In the early morning the sun
threw my shadow westward as I hurried down the white
chasms of lower New York to the Probity Trust. I knew the
other clerks and young bond-salesmen by their first names
and lunched with them in dark crowded restaurants on
little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I even 
62 The Great Gatsby
had a short affair with a girl who lived in Jersey City and
worked in the accounting department, but her brother began
throwing mean looks in my direction so when she went
on her vacation in July I let it blow quietly away.
I took dinner usually at the Yale Clubfor some reason
it was the gloomiest event of my dayand then I went upstairs
to the library and studied investments and securities
for a conscientious hour. There were generally a few rioters
around but they never came into the library so it was a good
place to work. After that, if the night was mellow I strolled
down Madison Avenue past the old Murray Hill Hotel and
over Thirty-third Street to the Pennsylvania Station.
I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous feel of
it at night and the satisfaction that the constant flicker of
men and women and machines gives to the restless eye. I
liked to walk up Fifth Avenue and pick out romantic women
from the crowd and imagine that in a few minutes I was
going to enter into their lives, and no one would ever know
or disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to
their apartments on the corners of hidden streets, and they
turned and smiled back at me before they faded through
a door into warm darkness. At the enchanted metropolitan
twilight I felt a haunting loneliness sometimes, and
felt it in otherspoor young clerks who loitered in front of
windows waiting until it was time for a solitary restaurant
dinneryoung clerks in the dusk, wasting the most poignant
moments of night and life.
Again at eight oclock, when the dark lanes of the Forties
were five deep with throbbing taxi cabs, bound for the 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 63
theatre district, I felt a sinking in my heart. Forms leaned
together in the taxis as they waited, and voices sang, and
there was laughter from unheard jokes, and lighted cigarettes
outlined unintelligible gestures inside. Imagining
that I, too, was hurrying toward gayety and sharing their
intimate excitement, I wished them well.
For a while I lost sight of Jordan Baker, and then in midsummer
I found her again. At first I was flattered to go
places with her because she was a golf champion and every
one knew her name. Then it was something more. I
wasnt actually in love, but I felt a sort of tender curiosity.
The bored haughty face that she turned to the world concealed
somethingmost affectations conceal something
eventually, even though they dont in the beginningand
one day I found what it was. When we were on a houseparty
together up in Warwick, she left a borrowed car out
in the rain with the top down, and then lied about itand
suddenly I remembered the story about her that had eluded
me that night at Daisys. At her first big golf tournament
there was a row that nearly reached the newspapersa suggestion
that she had moved her ball from a bad lie in the
semi-final round. The thing approached the proportions of
a scandalthen died away. A caddy retracted his statement
and the only other witness admitted that he might have
been mistaken. The incident and the name had remained
together in my mind.
Jordan Baker instinctively avoided clever shrewd men
and now I saw that this was because she felt safer on a plane
where any divergence from a code would be thought impos-
64 The Great Gatsby
sible. She was incurably dishonest. She wasnt able to endure
being at a disadvantage, and given this unwillingness I suppose
she had begun dealing in subterfuges when she was
very young in order to keep that cool, insolent smile turned
to the world and yet satisfy the demands of her hard jaunty
body.
It made no difference to me. Dishonesty in a woman is
a thing you never blame deeplyI was casually sorry, and
then I forgot. It was on that same house party that we had a
curious conversation about driving a car. It started because
she passed so close to some workmen that our fender flicked
a button on one mans coat.
Youre a rotten driver, I protested. Either you ought to
be more careful or you oughtnt to drive at all.
I am careful.
No, youre not.
Well, other people are, she said lightly.
Whats that got to do with it?
Theyll keep out of my way, she insisted. It takes two to
make an accident.
Suppose you met somebody just as careless as yourself.
I hope I never will, she answered. I hate careless people.
Thats why I like you.
Her grey, sun-strained eyes stared straight ahead, but
she had deliberately shifted our relations, and for a moment
I thought I loved her. But I am slow-thinking and full of
interior rules that act as brakes on my desires, and I knew
that first I had to get myself definitely out of that tangle
back home. Id been writing letters once a week and signing 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 65
them: Love, Nick, and all I could think of was how, when
that certain girl played tennis, a faint mustache of perspiration
appeared on her upper lip. Nevertheless there was a
vague understanding that had to be tactfully broken off before
I was free.
Every one suspects himself of at least one of the cardinal
virtues, and this is mine: I am one of the few honest people
that I have ever known.
66 The Great Gatsby
Chapter 4
On Sunday morning while church bells rang in the villages
along shore the world and its mistress returned
to Gatsbys house and twinkled hilariously on his lawn.
Hes a bootlegger, said the young ladies, moving somewhere
between his cocktails and his flowers. One time he
killed a man who had found out that he was nephew to von
Hindenburg and second cousin to the devil. Reach me a
rose, honey, and pour me a last drop into that there crystal
glass.
Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a time-table
the names of those who came to Gatsbys house that summer.
It is an old time-table now, disintegrating at its folds
and headed This schedule in effect July 5th, 1922. But I
can still read the grey names and they will give you a better
impression than my generalities of those who accepted
Gatsbys hospitality and paid him the subtle tribute of
knowing nothing whatever about him.
From East Egg, then, came the Chester Beckers and the
Leeches and a man named Bunsen whom I knew at Yale and
Doctor Webster Civet who was drowned last summer up in
Maine. And the Hornbeams and the Willie Voltaires and a
whole clan named Blackbuck who always gathered in a corner
and flipped up their noses like goats at whosoever came
near. And the Ismays and the Chrysties (or rather Hubert 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 67
Auerbach and Mr. Chrysties wife) and Edgar Beaver, whose
hair they say turned cotton-white one winter afternoon for
no good reason at all.
Clarence Endive was from East Egg, as I remember. He
came only once, in white knickerbockers, and had a fight
with a bum named Etty in the garden. From farther out
on the Island came the Cheadles and the O. R. P. Schraeders
and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of Georgia and the
Fishguards and the Ripley Snells. Snell was there three days
before he went to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the gravel
drive that Mrs. Ulysses Swetts automobile ran over his
right hand. The Dancies came too and S. B. Whitebait, who
was well over sixty, and Maurice A. Flink and the Hammerheads
and Beluga the tobacco importer and Belugas girls.
From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys and
Cecil Roebuck and Cecil Schoen and Gulick the state senator
and Newton Orchid who controlled Films Par Excellence
and Eckhaust and Clyde Cohen and Don S. Schwartze (the
son) and Arthur McCarty, all connected with the movies in
one way or another. And the Catlips and the Bembergs and
G. Earl Muldoon, brother to that Muldoon who afterward
strangled his wife. Da Fontano the promoter came there,
and Ed Legros and James B. (Rot-Gut) Ferret and the De
Jongs and Ernest Lillythey came to gamble and when Ferret
wandered into the garden it meant he was cleaned out
and Associated Traction would have to fluctuate profitably
next day.
A man named Klipspringer was there so often and so
long that he became known as the boarderI doubt if 
68 The Great Gatsby
he had any other home. Of theatrical people there were
Gus Waize and Horace ODonavan and Lester Meyer and
George Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also from New York
were the Chromes and the Backhyssons and the Dennickers
and Russel Betty and the Corrigans and the Kellehers
and the Dewars and the Scullys and S. W. Belcher and the
Smirkes and the young Quinns, divorced now, and Henry
L. Palmetto who killed himself by jumping in front of a subway
train in Times Square.
Benny McClenahan arrived always with four girls. They
were never quite the same ones in physical person but
they were so identical one with another that it inevitably
seemed they had been there before. I have forgotten their
namesJaqueline, I think, or else Consuela or Gloria or
Judy or June, and their last names were either the melodious
names of flowers and months or the sterner ones of the
great American capitalists whose cousins, if pressed, they
would confess themselves to be.
In addition to all these I can remember that Faustina
OBrien came there at least once and the Baedeker girls
and young Brewer who had his nose shot off in the war and
Mr. Albrucksburger and Miss Haag, his fiance, and Ardita
Fitz-Peters, and Mr. P. Jewett, once head of the American
Legion, and Miss Claudia Hip with a man reputed to be her
chauffeur, and a prince of something whom we called Duke
and whose name, if I ever knew it, I have forgotten.
All these people came to Gatsbys house in the summer.
At nine oclock, one morning late in July Gatsbys gorgeous
car lurched up the rocky drive to my door and gave 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 69
out a burst of melody from its three noted horn. It was the
first time he had called on me though I had gone to two of
his parties, mounted in his hydroplane, and, at his urgent
invitation, made frequent use of his beach.
Good morning, old sport. Youre having lunch with me
today and I thought wed ride up together.
He was balancing himself on the dashboard of his car
with that resourcefulness of movement that is so peculiarly
Americanthat comes, I suppose, with the absence of lifting
work or rigid sitting in youth and, even more, with the
formless grace of our nervous, sporadic games. This quality
was continually breaking through his punctilious manner
in the shape of restlessness. He was never quite still; there
was always a tapping foot somewhere or the impatient opening
and closing of a hand.
He saw me looking with admiration at his car.
Its pretty, isnt it, old sport. He jumped off to give me a
better view. Havent you ever seen it before?
Id seen it. Everybody had seen it. It was a rich cream
color, bright with nickel, swollen here and there in its monstrous
length with triumphant hatboxes and supper-boxes
and tool-boxes, and terraced with a labyrinth of windshields
that mirrored a dozen suns. Sitting down behind many layers
of glass in a sort of green leather conservatory we started
to town.
I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen times in the
past month and found, to my disappointment, that he had
little to say. So my first impression, that he was a person
of some undefined consequence, had gradually faded and 
70 The Great Gatsby
he had become simply the proprietor of an elaborate roadhouse
next door.
And then came that disconcerting ride. We hadnt
reached West Egg village before Gatsby began leaving his
elegant sentences unfinished and slapping himself indecisively
on the knee of his caramel-colored suit.
Look here, old sport, he broke out surprisingly. Whats
your opinion of me, anyhow?
A little overwhelmed, I began the generalized evasions
which that question deserves.
Well, Im going to tell you something about my life,
he interrupted. I dont want you to get a wrong idea of me
from all these stories you hear.
So he was aware of the bizarre accusations that flavored
conversation in his halls.
Ill tell you Gods truth. His right hand suddenly ordered
divine retribution to stand by. I am the son of some
wealthy people in the middle-westall dead now. I was
brought up in America but educated at Oxford because all
my ancestors have been educated there for many years. It is
a family tradition.
He looked at me sidewaysand I knew why Jordan Baker
had believed he was lying. He hurried the phrase educated
at Oxford, or swallowed it or choked on it as though it had
bothered him before. And with this doubt his whole statement
fell to pieces and I wondered if there wasnt something
a little sinister about him after all.
What part of the middle-west? I inquired casually.
San Francisco.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 71
I see.
My family all died and I came into a good deal of money.
His voice was solemn as if the memory of that sudden
extinction of a clan still haunted him. For a moment
I suspected that he was pulling my leg but a glance at him
convinced me otherwise.
After that I lived like a young rajah in all the capitals
of EuropeParis, Venice, Romecollecting jewels, chiefly
rubies, hunting big game, painting a little, things for myself
only, and trying to forget something very sad that had happened
to me long ago.
With an effort I managed to restrain my incredulous
laughter. The very phrases were worn so threadbare that
they evoked no image except that of a turbaned character
leaking sawdust at every pore as he pursued a tiger through
the Bois de Boulogne.
Then came the war, old sport. It was a great relief and
I tried very hard to die but I seemed to bear an enchanted
life. I accepted a commission as first lieutenant when it
began. In the Argonne Forest I took two machine-gun detachments
so far forward that there was a half mile gap on
either side of us where the infantry couldnt advance. We
stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirty
men with sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came
up at last they found the insignia of three German divisions
among the piles of dead. I was promoted to be a major and
every Allied government gave me a decorationeven Montenegro,
little Montenegro down on the Adriatic Sea!
72 The Great Gatsby
Little Montenegro! He lifted up the words and nodded
at themwith his smile. The smile comprehended Montenegros
troubled history and sympathized with the brave
struggles of the Montenegrin people. It appreciated fully
the chain of national circumstances which had elicited this
tribute from Montenegros warm little heart. My incredulity
was submerged in fascination now; it was like skimming
hastily through a dozen magazines.
He reached in his pocket and a piece of metal, slung on a
ribbon, fell into my palm.
Thats the one from Montenegro.
To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic look.
Orderi di Danilo, ran the circular legend, Montenegro,
Nicolas Rex.
Turn it.
Major Jay Gatsby, I read, For Valour Extraordinary.
Heres another thing I always carry. A souvenir of Oxford
days. It was taken in Trinity Quadthe man on my left
is now the Earl of Dorcaster.
It was a photograph of half a dozen young men in blazers
loafing in an archway through which were visible a host of
spires. There was Gatsby, looking a little, not much, youngerwith
a cricket bat in his hand.
Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigers flaming in
his palace on the Grand Canal; I saw him opening a chest of
rubies to ease, with their crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings
of his broken heart.
Im going to make a big request of you today, he said,
pocketing his souvenirs with satisfaction, so I thought you 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 73
ought to know something about me. I didnt want you to
think I was just some nobody. You see, I usually find myself
among strangers because I drift here and there trying
to forget the sad thing that happened to me. He hesitated.
Youll hear about it this afternoon.
At lunch?
No, this afternoon. I happened to find out that youre
taking Miss Baker to tea.
Do you mean youre in love with Miss Baker?
No, old sport, Im not. But Miss Baker has kindly consented
to speak to you about this matter.
I hadnt the faintest idea what this matter was, but I was
more annoyed than interested. I hadnt asked Jordan to tea
in order to discuss Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was sure the request
would be something utterly fantastic and for a moment I
was sorry Id ever set foot upon his overpopulated lawn.
He wouldnt say another word. His correctness grew on
him as we neared the city. We passed Port Roosevelt, where
there was a glimpse of red-belted ocean-going ships, and
sped along a cobbled slum lined with the dark, undeserted
saloons of the faded gilt nineteen-hundreds. Then the valley
of ashes opened out on both sides of us, and I had a glimpse
of Mrs. Wilson straining at the garage pump with panting
vitality as we went by.
With fenders spread like wings we scattered light through
half Astoriaonly half, for as we twisted among the pillars
of the elevated I heard the familiar jugjugSPAT! of a
motor cycle, and a frantic policeman rode alongside.
All right, old sport, called Gatsby. We slowed down. 
74 The Great Gatsby
Taking a white card from his wallet he waved it before the
mans eyes.
Right you are, agreed the policeman, tipping his cap.
Know you next time, Mr. Gatsby. Excuse ME!
What was that? I inquired. The picture of Oxford?
I was able to do the commissioner a favor once, and he
sends me a Christmas card every year.
Over the great bridge, with the sunlight through the
girders making a constant flicker upon the moving cars,
with the city rising up across the river in white heaps and
sugar lumps all built with a wish out of non-olfactory money.
The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is always the
city seen for the first time, in its first wild promise of all the
mystery and the beauty in the world.
A dead man passed us in a hearse heaped with blooms,
followed by two carriages with drawn blinds and by more
cheerful carriages for friends. The friends looked out at us
with the tragic eyes and short upper lips of south-eastern
Europe, and I was glad that the sight of Gatsbys splendid
car was included in their somber holiday. As we crossed
Blackwells Island a limousine passed us, driven by a white
chauffeur, in which sat three modish Negroes, two bucks
and a girl. I laughed aloud as the yolks of their eyeballs
rolled toward us in haughty rivalry.
Anything can happen now that weve slid over this
bridge, I thought; anything at all.
Even Gatsby could happen, without any particular wonder.
Roaring noon. In a well-fanned Forty-second Street cel-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 75
lar I met Gatsby for lunch. Blinking away the brightness of
the street outside my eyes picked him out obscurely in the
anteroom, talking to another man.
Mr. Carraway this is my friend Mr. Wolfshiem.
A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his large head and regarded
me with two fine growths of hair which luxuriated in
either nostril. After a moment I discovered his tiny eyes in
the half darkness.
so I took one look at him said Mr. Wolfshiem, shaking
my hand earnestly, and what do you think I did?
What? I inquired politely.
But evidently he was not addressing me for he dropped
my hand and covered Gatsby with his expressive nose.
I handed the money to Katspaugh and I sid, All right,
Katspaugh, dont pay him a penny till he shuts his mouth.
He shut it then and there.
Gatsby took an arm of each of us and moved forward
into the restaurant whereupon Mr. Wolfshiem swallowed a
new sentence he was starting and lapsed into a somnambulatory
abstraction.
Highballs? asked the head waiter.
This is a nice restaurant here, said Mr. Wolfshiem looking
at the Presbyterian nymphs on the ceiling. But I like
across the street better!
Yes, highballs, agreed Gatsby, and then to Mr. Wolfshiem:
Its too hot over there.
Hot and smallyes, said Mr. Wolfshiem, but full of
memories.
What place is that? I asked.
76 The Great Gatsby
The old Metropole.
The old Metropole, brooded Mr. Wolfshiem gloomily.
Filled with faces dead and gone. Filled with friends gone
now forever. I cant forget so long as I live the night they
shot Rosy Rosenthal there. It was six of us at the table and
Rosy had eat and drunk a lot all evening. When it was almost
morning the waiter came up to him with a funny
look and says somebody wants to speak to him outside. All
right, says Rosy and begins to get up and I pulled him down
in his chair.
 Let the bastards come in here if they want you, Rosy,
but dont you, so help me, move outside this room.
It was four oclock in the morning then, and if wed of
raised the blinds wed of seen daylight.
Did he go? I asked innocently.
Sure he went,Mr. Wolfshiems nose flashed at me indignantlyHe
turned around in the door and says, Dont
let that waiter take away my coffee! Then he went out on
the sidewalk and they shot him three times in his full belly
and drove away.
Four of them were electrocuted, I said, remembering.
Five with Becker. His nostrils turned to me in an interested
way. I understand youre looking for a business
gonnegtion.
The juxtaposition of these two remarks was startling.
Gatsby answered for me:
Oh, no, he exclaimed, this isnt the man!
No? Mr. Wolfshiem seemed disappointed.
This is just a friend. I told you wed talk about that some 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 77
other time.
I beg your pardon, said Mr. Wolfshiem, I had a wrong
man.
A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, forgetting
the more sentimental atmosphere of the old Metropole,
began to eat with ferocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile,
roved very slowly all around the roomhe completed the
arc by turning to inspect the people directly behind. I think
that, except for my presence, he would have taken one short
glance beneath our own table.
Look here, old sport, said Gatsby, leaning toward me,
Im afraid I made you a little angry this morning in the
car.
There was the smile again, but this time I held out against
it.
I dont like mysteries, I answered. And I dont understand
why you wont come out frankly and tell me what you
want. Why has it all got to come through Miss Baker?
Oh, its nothing underhand, he assured me. Miss Bakers
a great sportswoman, you know, and shed never do
anything that wasnt all right.
Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up and hurried
from the room leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table.
He has to telephone, said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him
with his eyes. Fine fellow, isnt he? Handsome to look at and
a perfect gentleman.
Yes.
Hes an Oggsford man.
Oh!
78 The Great Gatsby
He went to Oggsford College in England. You know
Oggsford College?
Ive heard of it.
Its one of the most famous colleges in the world.
Have you known Gatsby for a long time? I inquired.
Several years, he answered in a gratified way. I made
the pleasure of his acquaintance just after the war. But I
knew I had discovered a man of fine breeding after I talked
with him an hour. I said to myself: Theres the kind of man
youd like to take home and introduce to your mother and
sister.  He paused. I see youre looking at my cuff buttons.
I hadnt been looking at them, but I did now. They were
composed of oddly familiar pieces of ivory.
Finest specimens of human molars, he informed me.
Well! I inspected them. Thats a very interesting idea.
Yeah. He flipped his sleeves up under his coat. Yeah,
Gatsbys very careful about women. He would never so
much as look at a friends wife.
When the subject of this instinctive trust returned to the
table and sat down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a
jerk and got to his feet.
I have enjoyed my lunch, he said, and Im going to run
off from you two young men before I outstay my welcome.
Dont hurry, Meyer, said Gatsby, without enthusiasm.
Mr. Wolfshiem raised his hand in a sort of benediction.
Youre very polite but I belong to another generation, he
announced solemnly. You sit here and discuss your sports
and your young ladies and your He supplied an imaginary
noun with another wave of his handAs for me, I am 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 79
fifty years old, and I wont impose myself on you any longer.
As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was
trembling. I wondered if I had said anything to offend him.
He becomes very sentimental sometimes, explained
Gatsby. This is one of his sentimental days. Hes quite a
character around New Yorka denizen of Broadway.
Who is he anyhowan actor?
No.
A dentist?
Meyer Wolfshiem? No, hes a gambler. Gatsby hesitated,
then added coolly: Hes the man who fixed the Worlds Series
back in 1919.
Fixed the Worlds Series? I repeated.
The idea staggered me. I remembered of course that the
Worlds Series had been fixed in 1919 but if I had thought
of it at all I would have thought of it as a thing that merely
HAPPENED, the end of some inevitable chain. It never
occurred to me that one man could start to play with the
faith of fifty million peoplewith the single-mindedness of
a burglar blowing a safe.
How did he happen to do that? I asked after a minute.
He just saw the opportunity.
Why isnt he in jail?
They cant get him, old sport. Hes a smart man.
I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter brought my
change I caught sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded
room.
Come along with me for a minute, I said. Ive got to say 
80 The Great Gatsby
hello to someone.
When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen
steps in our direction.
Whereve you been? he demanded eagerly. Daisys furious
because you havent called up.
This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan.
They shook hands briefly and a strained, unfamiliar look
of embarrassment came over Gatsbys face.
Howve you been, anyhow? demanded Tom of me.
Howd you happen to come up this far to eat?
Ive been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby.
I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longer there.
One October day in nineteen-seventeen (said Jordan
Baker that afternoon, sitting up very straight on a straight
chair in the tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel) I was walking
along from one place to another half on the sidewalks
and half on the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because I
had on shoes from England with rubber nobs on the soles
that bit into the soft ground. I had on a new plaid skirt also
that blew a little in the wind and whenever this happened
the red, white and blue banners in front of all the houses
stretched out stiff and said TUT-TUT-TUT-TUT in a disapproving
way.
The largest of the banners and the largest of the lawns
belonged to Daisy Fays house. She was just eighteen, two
years older than me, and by far the most popular of all the
young girls in Louisville. She dressed in white, and had a
little white roadster and all day long the telephone rang
in her house and excited young officers from Camp Tay-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 81
lor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her that night,
anyways, for an hour!
When I came opposite her house that morning her white
roadster was beside the curb, and she was sitting in it with a
lieutenant I had never seen before. They were so engrossed
in each other that she didnt see me until I was five feet
away.
Hello Jordan, she called unexpectedly. Please come
here.
I was flattered that she wanted to speak to me, because
of all the older girls I admired her most. She asked me if I
was going to the Red Cross and make bandages. I was. Well,
then, would I tell them that she couldnt come that day? The
officer looked at Daisy while she was speaking, in a way
that every young girl wants to be looked at sometime, and
because it seemed romantic to me I have remembered the
incident ever since. His name was Jay Gatsby and I didnt
lay eyes on him again for over four yearseven after Id met
him on Long Island I didnt realize it was the same man.
That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next year I had a
few beaux myself, and I began to play in tournaments, so
I didnt see Daisy very often. She went with a slightly older
crowdwhen she went with anyone at all. Wild rumors
were circulating about herhow her mother had found her
packing her bag one winter night to go to New York and say
goodbye to a soldier who was going overseas. She was effectually
prevented, but she wasnt on speaking terms with her
family for several weeks. After that she didnt play around
with the soldiers any more but only with a few flat-footed, 
82 The Great Gatsby
short-sighted young men in town who couldnt get into the
army at all.
By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as ever. She
had a debut after the Armistice, and in February she was
presumably engaged to a man from New Orleans. In June
she married Tom Buchanan of Chicago with more pomp
and circumstance than Louisville ever knew before. He
came down with a hundred people in four private cars and
hired a whole floor of the Seelbach Hotel, and the day before
the wedding he gave her a string of pearls valued at three
hundred and fifty thousand dollars.
I was bridesmaid. I came into her room half an hour before
the bridal dinner, and found her lying on her bed as
lovely as the June night in her flowered dressand as drunk
as a monkey. She had a bottle of sauterne in one hand and a
letter in the other.
 Gratulate me, she muttered. Never had a drink before
but oh, how I do enjoy it.
Whats the matter, Daisy?
I was scared, I can tell you; Id never seen a girl like that
before.
Here, dearis. She groped around in a waste-basket she
had with her on the bed and pulled out the string of pearls.
Take em downstairs and give em back to whoever they
belong to. Tell em all Daisys change her mine. Say Daisys
change her mine!.
She began to cryshe cried and cried. I rushed out and
found her mothers maid and we locked the door and got
her into a cold bath. She wouldnt let go of the letter. She 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 83
took it into the tub with her and squeezed it up into a wet
ball, and only let me leave it in the soap dish when she saw
that it was coming to pieces like snow.
But she didnt say another word. We gave her spirits of
ammonia and put ice on her forehead and hooked her back
into her dress and half an hour later when we walked out of
the room the pearls were around her neck and the incident
was over. Next day at five oclock she married Tom Buchanan
without so much as a shiver and started off on a three
months trip to the South Seas.
I saw them in Santa Barbara when they came back and
I thought Id never seen a girl so mad about her husband.
If he left the room for a minute shed look around uneasily
and say Wheres Tom gone? and wear the most abstracted
expression until she saw him coming in the door. She
used to sit on the sand with his head in her lap by the hour
rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking at him with
unfathomable delight. It was touching to see them togetherit
made you laugh in a hushed, fascinated way. That was
in August. A week after I left Santa Barbara Tom ran into
a wagon on the Ventura road one night and ripped a front
wheel off his car. The girl who was with him got into the papers
too because her arm was brokenshe was one of the
chambermaids in the Santa Barbara Hotel.
The next April Daisy had her little girl and they went to
France for a year. I saw them one spring in Cannes and later
in Deauville and then they came back to Chicago to settle
down. Daisy was popular in Chicago, as you know. They
moved with a fast crowd, all of them young and rich and 
84 The Great Gatsby
wild, but she came out with an absolutely perfect reputation.
Perhaps because she doesnt drink. Its a great advantage not
to drink among hard-drinking people. You can hold your
tongue and, moreover, you can time any little irregularity
of your own so that everybody else is so blind that they
dont see or care. Perhaps Daisy never went in for amour at
alland yet theres something in that voice of hers.
Well, about six weeks ago, she heard the name Gatsby for
the first time in years. It was when I asked youdo you remember?if
you knew Gatsby in West Egg. After you had
gone home she came into my room and woke me up, and
said What Gatsby? and when I described himI was half
asleepshe said in the strangest voice that it must be the
man she used to know. It wasnt until then that I connected
this Gatsby with the officer in her white car.
When Jordan Baker had finished telling all this we had
left the Plaza for half an hour and were driving in a Victoria
through Central Park. The sun had gone down behind the
tall apartments of the movie stars in the West Fifties and
the clear voices of girls, already gathered like crickets on the
grass, rose through the hot twilight:
Im the Sheik of Araby,
Your love belongs to me.
At night when youre are asleep,
Into your tent Ill creep
It was a strange coincidence, I said.
But it wasnt a coincidence at all.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 85
Why not?
Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just
across the bay.
Then it had not been merely the stars to which he had
aspired on that June night. He came alive to me, delivered
suddenly from the womb of his purposeless splendor.
He wants to know continued Jordan if youll invite
Daisy to your house some afternoon and then let him
come over.
The modesty of the demand shook me. He had waited
five years and bought a mansion where he dispensed starlight
to casual moths so that he could come over some
afternoon to a strangers garden.
Did I have to know all this before he could ask such a
little thing?
Hes afraid. Hes waited so long. He thought you might
be offended. You see hes a regular tough underneath it all.
Something worried me.
Why didnt he ask you to arrange a meeting?
He wants her to see his house, she explained. And your
house is right next door.
Oh!
I think he half expected her to wander into one of his
parties, some night, went on Jordan, but she never did.
Then he began asking people casually if they knew her, and
I was the first one he found. It was that night he sent for me
at his dance, and you should have heard the elaborate way
he worked up to it. Of course, I immediately suggested a
luncheon in New Yorkand I thought hed go mad:
86 The Great Gatsby
 I dont want to do anything out of the way! he kept saying.
I want to see her right next door.
When I said you were a particular friend of Toms he
started to abandon the whole idea. He doesnt know very
much about Tom, though he says hes read a Chicago paper
for years just on the chance of catching a glimpse of Daisys
name.
It was dark now, and as we dipped under a little bridge
I put my arm around Jordans golden shoulder and drew
her toward me and asked her to dinner. Suddenly I wasnt
thinking of Daisy and Gatsby any more but of this clean,
hard, limited person who dealt in universal skepticism and
who leaned back jauntily just within the circle of my arm. A
phrase began to beat in my ears with a sort of heady excitement:
There are only the pursued, the pursuing, the busy
and the tired.
And Daisy ought to have something in her life, murmured
Jordan to me.
Does she want to see Gatsby?
Shes not to know about it. Gatsby doesnt want her to
know. Youre just supposed to invite her to tea.
We passed a barrier of dark trees, and then the facade
of Fifty-ninth Street, a block of delicate pale light, beamed
down into the park. Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan I
had no girl whose disembodied face floated along the dark
cornices and blinding signs and so I drew up the girl beside
me, tightening my arms. Her wan, scornful mouth smiled
and so I drew her up again, closer, this time to my face.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 87
Chapter 5
When I came home to West Egg that night I was afraid
for a moment that my house was on fire. Two oclock
and the whole corner of the peninsula was blazing with light
which fell unreal on the shrubbery and made thin elongating
glints upon the roadside wires. Turning a corner I saw
that it was Gatsbys house, lit from tower to cellar.
At first I thought it was another party, a wild rout that
had resolved itself into hide-and-go-seek or sardines-inthe-box
with all the house thrown open to the game. But
there wasnt a sound. Only wind in the trees which blew the
wires and made the lights go off and on again as if the house
had winked into the darkness. As my taxi groaned away I
saw Gatsby walking toward me across his lawn.
Your place looks like the worlds fair, I said.
Does it? He turned his eyes toward it absently. I have
been glancing into some of the rooms. Lets go to Coney Island,
old sport. In my car.
Its too late.
Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool? I
havent made use of it all summer.
Ive got to go to bed.
All right.
He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagerness.
I talked with Miss Baker, I said after a moment. Im go-
88 The Great Gatsby
ing to call up Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to
tea.
Oh, thats all right, he said carelessly. I dont want to put
you to any trouble.
What day would suit you?
What day would suit YOU? he corrected me quickly. I
dont want to put you to any trouble, you see.
How about the day after tomorrow? He considered for a
moment. Then, with reluctance:
I want to get the grass cut, he said.
We both looked at the grassthere was a sharp line
where my ragged lawn ended and the darker, well-kept expanse
of his began. I suspected that he meant my grass.
Theres another little thing, he said uncertainly, and
hesitated.
Would you rather put it off for a few days? I asked.
Oh, it isnt about that. At least He fumbled with a
series of beginnings. Why, I thoughtwhy, look here, old
sport, you dont make much money, do you?
Not very much.
This seemed to reassure him and he continued more
confidently.
I thought you didnt, if youll pardon myyou see,
I carry on a little business on the side, a sort of sideline,
you understand. And I thought that if you dont make very
muchYoure selling bonds, arent you, old sport?
Trying to.
Well, this would interest you. It wouldnt take up much
of your time and you might pick up a nice bit of money. It 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 89
happens to be a rather confidential sort of thing.
I realize now that under different circumstances that
conversation might have been one of the crises of my life.
But, because the offer was obviously and tactlessly for a service
to be rendered, I had no choice except to cut him off
there.
Ive got my hands full, I said. Im much obliged but I
couldnt take on any more work.
You wouldnt have to do any business with Wolfshiem.
Evidently he thought that I was shying away from the gonnegtion
mentioned at lunch, but I assured him he was
wrong. He waited a moment longer, hoping Id begin a conversation,
but I was too absorbed to be responsive, so he
went unwillingly home.
The evening had made me light-headed and happy; I
think I walked into a deep sleep as I entered my front door.
So I didnt know whether or not Gatsby went to Coney Island
or for how many hours he glanced into rooms while
his house blazed gaudily on. I called up Daisy from the office
next morning and invited her to come to tea.
Dont bring Tom, I warned her.
What?
Dont bring Tom.
Who is Tom? she asked innocently.
The day agreed upon was pouring rain. At eleven oclock
a man in a raincoat dragging a lawn-mower tapped at my
front door and said that Mr. Gatsby had sent him over to
cut my grass. This reminded me that I had forgotten to tell
my Finn to come back so I drove into West Egg Village to 
90 The Great Gatsby
search for her among soggy white-washed alleys and to buy
some cups and lemons and flowers.
The flowers were unnecessary, for at two oclock a greenhouse
arrived from Gatsbys, with innumerable receptacles
to contain it. An hour later the front door opened nervously,
and Gatsby in a white flannel suit, silver shirt and gold-colored
tie hurried in. He was pale and there were dark signs of
sleeplessness beneath his eyes.
Is everything all right? he asked immediately.
The grass looks fine, if thats what you mean.
What grass? he inquired blankly. Oh, the grass in the
yard. He looked out the window at it, but judging from his
expression I dont believe he saw a thing.
Looks very good, he remarked vaguely. One of the
papers said they thought the rain would stop about four.
I think it was The Journal. Have you got everything you
need in the shape ofof tea?
I took him into the pantry where he looked a little reproachfully
at the Finn. Together we scrutinized the twelve
lemon cakes from the delicatessen shop.
Will they do? I asked.
Of course, of course! Theyre fine! and he added hollowly,
old sport.
The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist
through which occasional thin drops swam like dew. Gatsby
looked with vacant eyes through a copy of Clays Economics,
starting at the Finnish tread that shook the kitchen
floor and peering toward the bleared windows from time to
time as if a series of invisible but alarming happenings were 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 91
taking place outside. Finally he got up and informed me in
an uncertain voice that he was going home.
Whys that?
Nobodys coming to tea. Its too late! He looked at his
watch as if there was some pressing demand on his time
elsewhere. I cant wait all day.
Dont be silly; its just two minutes to four.
He sat down, miserably, as if I had pushed him, and simultaneously
there was the sound of a motor turning into
my lane. We both jumped up and, a little harrowed myself,
I went out into the yard.
Under the dripping bare lilac trees a large open car was
coming up the drive. It stopped. Daisys face, tipped sideways
beneath a three-cornered lavender hat, looked out at
me with a bright ecstatic smile.
Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?
The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a wild tonic in
the rain. I had to follow the sound of it for a moment, up and
down, with my ear alone before any words came through. A
damp streak of hair lay like a dash of blue paint across her
cheek and her hand was wet with glistening drops as I took
it to help her from the car.
Are you in love with me, she said low in my ear. Or why
did I have to come alone?
Thats the secret of Castle Rackrent. Tell your chauffeur
to go far away and spend an hour.
Come back in an hour, Ferdie. Then in a grave murmur,
His name is Ferdie.
Does the gasoline affect his nose?
92 The Great Gatsby
I dont think so, she said innocently. Why?
We went in. To my overwhelming surprise the living
room was deserted.
Well, thats funny! I exclaimed.
Whats funny?
She turned her head as there was a light, dignified knocking
at the front door. I went out and opened it. Gatsby, pale
as death, with his hands plunged like weights in his coat
pockets, was standing in a puddle of water glaring tragically
into my eyes.
With his hands still in his coat pockets he stalked by me
into the hall, turned sharply as if he were on a wire and disappeared
into the living room. It wasnt a bit funny. Aware
of the loud beating of my own heart I pulled the door to
against the increasing rain.
For half a minute there wasnt a sound. Then from the
living room I heard a sort of choking murmur and part of a
laugh followed by Daisys voice on a clear artificial note.
I certainly am awfully glad to see you again.
A pause; it endured horribly. I had nothing to do in the
hall so I went into the room.
Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was reclining
against the mantelpiece in a strained counterfeit of perfect
ease, even of boredom. His head leaned back so far that it
rested against the face of a defunct mantelpiece clock and
from this position his distraught eyes stared down at Daisy
who was sitting frightened but graceful on the edge of a stiff
chair.
Weve met before, muttered Gatsby. His eyes glanced 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 93
momentarily at me and his lips parted with an abortive
attempt at a laugh. Luckily the clock took this moment to
tilt dangerously at the pressure of his head, whereupon he
turned and caught it with trembling fingers and set it back
in place. Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the arm of
the sofa and his chin in his hand.
Im sorry about the clock, he said.
My own face had now assumed a deep tropical burn. I
couldnt muster up a single commonplace out of the thousand
in my head.
Its an old clock, I told them idiotically.
I think we all believed for a moment that it had smashed
in pieces on the floor.
We havent met for many years, said Daisy, her voice as
matter-of-fact as it could ever be.
Five years next November.
The automatic quality of Gatsbys answer set us all back
at least another minute. I had them both on their feet with
the desperate suggestion that they help me make tea in the
kitchen when the demoniac Finn brought it in on a tray.
Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a certain
physical decency established itself. Gatsby got himself
into a shadow and while Daisy and I talked looked conscientiously
from one to the other of us with tense unhappy
eyes. However, as calmness wasnt an end in itself I made an
excuse at the first possible moment and got to my feet.
Where are you going? demanded Gatsby in immediate
alarm.
Ill be back.
94 The Great Gatsby
Ive got to speak to you about something before you go.
He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed the door
and whispered: Oh, God! in a miserable way.
Whats the matter?
This is a terrible mistake, he said, shaking his head from
side to side, a terrible, terrible mistake.
Youre just embarrassed, thats all, and luckily I added:
Daisys embarrassed too.
Shes embarrassed? he repeated incredulously.
Just as much as you are.
Dont talk so loud.
Youre acting like a little boy, I broke out impatiently.
Not only that but youre rude. Daisys sitting in there all
alone.
He raised his hand to stop my words, looked at me with
unforgettable reproach and opening the door cautiously
went back into the other room.
I walked out the back wayjust as Gatsby had when he
had made his nervous circuit of the house half an hour beforeand
ran for a huge black knotted tree whose massed
leaves made a fabric against the rain. Once more it was
pouring and my irregular lawn, well-shaved by Gatsbys
gardener, abounded in small muddy swamps and prehistoric
marshes. There was nothing to look at from under
the tree except Gatsbys enormous house, so I stared at it,
like Kant at his church steeple, for half an hour. A brewer
had built it early in the period craze, a decade before, and
there was a story that hed agreed to pay five years taxes
on all the neighboring cottages if the owners would have 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 95
their roofs thatched with straw. Perhaps their refusal took
the heart out of his plan to Found a Familyhe went into
an immediate decline. His children sold his house with the
black wreath still on the door. Americans, while occasionally
willing to be serfs, have always been obstinate about
being peasantry.
After half an hour the sun shone again and the grocers
automobile rounded Gatsbys drive with the raw material
for his servants dinnerI felt sure he wouldnt eat a spoonful.
A maid began opening the upper windows of his house,
appeared momentarily in each, and, leaning from a large
central bay, spat meditatively into the garden. It was time I
went back. While the rain continued it had seemed like the
murmur of their voices, rising and swelling a little, now and
the, with gusts of emotion. But in the new silence I felt that
silence had fallen within the house too.
I went inafter making every possible noise in the kitchen
short of pushing over the stovebut I dont believe they
heard a sound. They were sitting at either end of the couch
looking at each other as if some question had been asked
or was in the air, and every vestige of embarrassment was
gone. Daisys face was smeared with tears and when I came
in she jumped up and began wiping at it with her handkerchief
before a mirror. But there was a change in Gatsby
that was simply confounding. He literally glowed; without
a word or a gesture of exultation a new well-being radiated
from him and filled the little room.
Oh, hello, old sport, he said, as if he hadnt seen me
for years. I thought for a moment he was going to shake 
96 The Great Gatsby
hands.
Its stopped raining.
Has it? When he realized what I was talking about, that
there were twinkle-bells of sunshine in the room, he smiled
like a weather man, like an ecstatic patron of recurrent light,
and repeated the news to Daisy. What do you think of that?
Its stopped raining.
Im glad, Jay. Her throat, full of aching, grieving beauty,
told only of her unexpected joy.
I want you and Daisy to come over to my house, he said,
Id like to show her around.
Youre sure you want me to come?
Absolutely, old sport.
Daisy went upstairs to wash her facetoo late I thought
with humiliation of my towelswhile Gatsby and I waited
on the lawn.
My house looks well, doesnt it? he demanded. See how
the whole front of it catches the light.
I agreed that it was splendid.
Yes. His eyes went over it, every arched door and square
tower. It took me just three years to earn the money that
bought it.
I thought you inherited your money.
I did, old sport, he said automatically, but I lost most of
it in the big panicthe panic of the war.
I think he hardly knew what he was saying, for when I
asked him what business he was in he answered Thats my
affair, before he realized that it wasnt the appropriate reply.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 97
Oh, Ive been in several things, he corrected himself. I
was in the drug business and then I was in the oil business.
But Im not in either one now. He looked at me with more
attention. Do you mean youve been thinking over what I
proposed the other night?
Before I could answer, Daisy came out of the house and
two rows of brass buttons on her dress gleamed in the sunlight.
That huge place THERE? she cried pointing.
Do you like it?
I love it, but I dont see how you live there all alone.
I keep it always full of interesting people, night and day.
People who do interesting things. Celebrated people.
Instead of taking the short cut along the Sound we went
down the road and entered by the big postern. With enchanting
murmurs Daisy admired this aspect or that of the
feudal silhouette against the sky, admired the gardens, the
sparkling odor of jonquils and the frothy odor of hawthorn
and plum blossoms and the pale gold odor of kiss-me-atthe-gate.
It was strange to reach the marble steps and find
no stir of bright dresses in and out the door, and hear no
sound but bird voices in the trees.
And inside as we wandered through Marie Antoinette
music rooms and Restoration salons I felt that there were
guests concealed behind every couch and table, under orders
to be breathlessly silent until we had passed through.
As Gatsby closed the door of the Merton College Library
I could have sworn I heard the owl-eyed man break into
ghostly laughter.
98 The Great Gatsby
We went upstairs, through period bedrooms swathed in
rose and lavender silk and vivid with new flowers, through
dressing rooms and poolrooms, and bathrooms with sunken
bathsintruding into one chamber where a dishevelled
man in pajamas was doing liver exercises on the floor. It
was Mr. Klipspringer, the boarder. I had seen him wandering
hungrily about the beach that morning. Finally we came
to Gatsbys own apartment, a bedroom and a bath and an
Adam study, where we sat down and drank a glass of some
Chartreuse he took from a cupboard in the wall.
He hadnt once ceased looking at Daisy and I think he
revalued everything in his house according to the measure
of response it drew from her well-loved eyes. Sometimes,
too, he stared around at his possessions in a dazed way as
though in her actual and astounding presence none of it
was any longer real. Once he nearly toppled down a flight
of stairs.
His bedroom was the simplest room of allexcept where
the dresser was garnished with a toilet set of pure dull gold.
Daisy took the brush with delight and smoothed her hair,
whereupon Gatsby sat down and shaded his eyes and began
to laugh.
Its the funniest thing, old sport, he said hilariously. I
cantwhen I try to
He had passed visibly through two states and was entering
upon a third. After his embarrassment and his
unreasoning joy he was consumed with wonder at her presence.
He had been full of the idea so long, dreamed it right
through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so to speak, at 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 99
an inconceivable pitch of intensity. Now, in the reaction, he
was running down like an overwound clock.
Recovering himself in a minute he opened for us two
hulking patent cabinets which held his massed suits and
dressing-gowns and ties, and his shirts, piled like bricks in
stacks a dozen high.
Ive got a man in England who buys me clothes. He sends
over a selection of things at the beginning of each season,
spring and fall.
He took out a pile of shirts and began throwing them, one
by one before us, shirts of sheer linen and thick silk and fine
flannel which lost their folds as they fell and covered the table
in many-colored disarray. While we admired he brought
more and the soft rich heap mounted highershirts with
stripes and scrolls and plaids in coral and apple-green and
lavender and faint orange with monograms of Indian blue.
Suddenly with a strained sound, Daisy bent her head into
the shirts and began to cry stormily.
Theyre such beautiful shirts, she sobbed, her voice muffled
in the thick folds. It makes me sad because Ive never
seen suchsuch beautiful shirts before.
After the house, we were to see the grounds and the
swimming pool, and the hydroplane and the midsummer
flowersbut outside Gatsbys window it began to rain again
so we stood in a row looking at the corrugated surface of
the Sound.
If it wasnt for the mist we could see your home across
the bay, said Gatsby. You always have a green light that
burns all night at the end of your dock.
100 The Great Gatsby
Daisy put her arm through his abruptly but he seemed
absorbed in what he had just said. Possibly it had occurred
to him that the colossal significance of that light had now
vanished forever. Compared to the great distance that had
separated him from Daisy it had seemed very near to her,
almost touching her. It had seemed as close as a star to the
moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count
of enchanted objects had diminished by one.
I began to walk about the room, examining various indefinite
objects in the half darkness. A large photograph of
an elderly man in yachting costume attracted me, hung on
the wall over his desk.
Whos this?
That? Thats Mr. Dan Cody, old sport.
The name sounded faintly familiar.
Hes dead now. He used to be my best friend years ago.
There was a small picture of Gatsby, also in yachting costume,
on the bureauGatsby with his head thrown back
defiantlytaken apparently when he was about eighteen.
I adore it! exclaimed Daisy. The pompadour! You never
told me you had a pompadouror a yacht.
Look at this, said Gatsby quickly. Heres a lot of clippingsabout
you.
They stood side by side examining it. I was going to ask
to see the rubies when the phone rang and Gatsby took up
the receiver.
Yes. Well, I cant talk now. I cant talk now, old
sport. I said a SMALL town. He must know what a
small town is. Well, hes no use to us if Detroit is his idea 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 101
of a small town.
He rang off.
Come here QUICK! cried Daisy at the window.
The rain was still falling, but the darkness had parted in
the west, and there was a pink and golden billow of foamy
clouds above the sea.
Look at that, she whispered, and then after a moment:
Id like to just get one of those pink clouds and put you in it
and push you around.
I tried to go then, but they wouldnt hear of it; perhaps
my presence made them feel more satisfactorily alone.
I know what well do, said Gatsby, well have Klipspringer
play the piano.
He went out of the room calling Ewing! and returned
in a few minutes accompanied by an embarrassed, slightly
worn young man with shell-rimmed glasses and scanty
blonde hair. He was now decently clothed in a sport shirt
open at the neck, sneakers and duck trousers of a nebulous
hue.
Did we interrupt your exercises? inquired Daisy politely.
I was asleep, cried Mr. Klipspringer, in a spasm of embarrassment.
That is, Id BEEN asleep. Then I got up.
Klipspringer plays the piano, said Gatsby, cutting him
off. Dont you, Ewing, old sport?
I dont play well. I dontI hardly play at all. Im all out
of prac
Well go downstairs, interrupted Gatsby. He flipped a
switch. The grey windows disappeared as the house glowed 
102 The Great Gatsby
full of light.
In the music room Gatsby turned on a solitary lamp
beside the piano. He lit Daisys cigarette from a trembling
match, and sat down with her on a couch far across the
room where there was no light save what the gleaming floor
bounced in from the hall.
When Klipspringer had played The Love Nest he turned
around on the bench and searched unhappily for Gatsby in
the gloom.
Im all out of practice, you see. I told you I couldnt play.
Im all out of prac
Dont talk so much, old sport, commanded Gatsby.
Play!
IN THE MORNING,
IN THE EVENING,
AINT WE GOT FUN
Outside the wind was loud and there was a faint flow
of thunder along the Sound. All the lights were going on
in West Egg now; the electric trains, men-carrying, were
plunging home through the rain from New York. It was the
hour of a profound human change, and excitement was generating
on the air.
ONE THINGS SURE AND NOTHINGS SURER
THE RICH GET RICHER AND THE POOR GET
CHILDREN.
IN THE MEANTIME,
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 103
IN BETWEEN TIME
As I went over to say goodbye I saw that the expression of
bewilderment had come back into Gatsbys face, as though
a faint doubt had occurred to him as to the quality of his
present happiness. Almost five years! There must have been
moments even that afternoon when Daisy tumbled short
of his dreamsnot through her own fault but because of
the colossal vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond her,
beyond everything. He had thrown himself into it with a
creative passion, adding to it all the time, decking it out
with every bright feather that drifted his way. No amount
of fire or freshness can challenge what a man will store up
in his ghostly heart.
As I watched him he adjusted himself a little, visibly.
His hand took hold of hers and as she said something low
in his ear he turned toward her with a rush of emotion. I
think that voice held him most with its fluctuating, feverish
warmth because it couldnt be over-dreamedthat voice
was a deathless song.
They had forgotten me, but Daisy glanced up and held
out her hand; Gatsby didnt know me now at all. I looked
once more at them and they looked back at me, remotely,
possessed by intense life. Then I went out of the room and
down the marble steps into the rain, leaving them there together.
104 The Great Gatsby
Chapter 6
About this time an ambitious young reporter from New
York arrived one morning at Gatsbys door and asked
him if he had anything to say.
Anything to say about what? inquired Gatsby politely.
Why,any statement to give out.
It transpired after a confused five minutes that the man
had heard Gatsbys name around his office in a connection
which he either wouldnt reveal or didnt fully understand.
This was his day off and with laudable initiative he had hurried
out to see.
It was a random shot, and yet the reporters instinct was
right. Gatsbys notoriety, spread about by the hundreds who
had accepted his hospitality and so become authorities on
his past, had increased all summer until he fell just short
of being news. Contemporary legends such as the underground
pipe-line to Canada attached themselves to him,
and there was one persistent story that he didnt live in a
house at all, but in a boat that looked like a house and was
moved secretly up and down the Long Island shore. Just
why these inventions were a source of satisfaction to James
Gatz of North Dakota, isnt easy to say.
James Gatzthat was really, or at least legally, his name.
He had changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific
moment that witnessed the beginning of his careerwhen 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 105
he saw Dan Codys yacht drop anchor over the most insidious
flat on Lake Superior. It was James Gatz who had been
loafing along the beach that afternoon in a torn green jersey
and a pair of canvas pants, but it was already Jay Gatsby
who borrowed a row-boat, pulled out to the TUOLOMEE
and informed Cody that a wind might catch him and break
him up in half an hour.
I suppose hed had the name ready for a long time, even
then. His parents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm peoplehis
imagination had never really accepted them as
his parents at all. The truth was that Jay Gatsby, of West
Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic conception of
himself. He was a son of Goda phrase which, if it means
anything, means just thatand he must be about His
Fathers Business, the service of a vast, vulgar and meretricious
beauty. So he invented just the sort of Jay Gatsby that
a seventeen-year-old boy would be likely to invent, and to
this conception he was faithful to the end.
For over a year he had been beating his way along the
south shore of Lake Superior as a clam digger and a salmon
fisher or in any other capacity that brought him food and
bed. His brown, hardening body lived naturally through
the half fierce, half lazy work of the bracing days. He knew
women early and since they spoiled him he became contemptuous
of them, of young virgins because they were
ignorant, of the others because they were hysterical about
things which in his overwhelming self-absorption he took
for granted.
But his heart was in a constant, turbulent riot. The most 
106 The Great Gatsby
grotesque and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at
night. A universe of ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in
his brain while the clock ticked on the wash-stand and the
moon soaked with wet light his tangled clothes upon the
floor. Each night he added to the pattern of his fancies until
drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with an
oblivious embrace. For a while these reveries provided an
outlet for his imagination; they were a satisfactory hint of
the unreality of reality, a promise that the rock of the world
was founded securely on a fairys wing.
An instinct toward his future glory had led him, some
months before, to the small Lutheran college of St. Olaf in
southern Minnesota. He stayed there two weeks, dismayed
at its ferocious indifference to the drums of his destiny, to
destiny itself, and despising the janitors work with which
he was to pay his way through. Then he drifted back to Lake
Superior, and he was still searching for something to do on
the day that Dan Codys yacht dropped anchor in the shallows
along shore.
Cody was fifty years old then, a product of the Nevada
silver fields, of the Yukon, of every rush for metal since Seventy-five.
The transactions in Montana copper that made
him many times a millionaire found him physically robust
but on the verge of soft-mindedness, and, suspecting this
an infinite number of women tried to separate him from
his money. The none too savory ramifications by which Ella
Kaye, the newspaper woman, played Madame de Maintenon
to his weakness and sent him to sea in a yacht, were
common knowledge to the turgid journalism of 1902. He 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 107
had been coasting along all too hospitable shores for five
years when he turned up as James Gatzs destiny at Little
Girl Bay.
To the young Gatz, resting on his oars and looking up
at the railed deck, the yacht represented all the beauty and
glamor in the world. I suppose he smiled at Codyhe had
probably discovered that people liked him when he smiled.
At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one of them
elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick,
and extravagantly ambitious. A few days later he took him
to Duluth and bought him a blue coat, six pair of white duck
trousers and a yachting cap. And when the TUOLOMEE
left for the West Indies and the Barbary Coast Gatsby left
too.
He was employed in a vague personal capacitywhile
he remained with Cody he was in turn steward, mate, skipper,
secretary, and even jailor, for Dan Cody sober knew
what lavish doings Dan Cody drunk might soon be about
and he provided for such contingencies by reposing more
and more trust in Gatsby. The arrangement lasted five years
during which the boat went three times around the continent.
It might have lasted indefinitely except for the fact
that Ella Kaye came on board one night in Boston and a
week later Dan Cody inhospitably died.
I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsbys bedroom,
a grey, florid man with a hard empty facethe pioneer debauchee
who during one phase of American life brought
back to the eastern seaboard the savage violence of the frontier
brothel and saloon. It was indirectly due to Cody that 
108 The Great Gatsby
Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes in the course of gay parties
women used to rub champagne into his hair; for himself
he formed the habit of letting liquor alone.
And it was from Cody that he inherited moneya legacy
of twenty-five thousand dollars. He didnt get it. He never
understood the legal device that was used against him
but what remained of the millions went intact to Ella Kaye.
He was left with his singularly appropriate education; the
vague contour of Jay Gatsby had filled out to the substantiality
of a man.
He told me all this very much later, but Ive put it down
here with the idea of exploding those first wild rumors about
his antecedents, which werent even faintly true. Moreover
he told it to me at a time of confusion, when I had reached
the point of believing everything and nothing about him.
So I take advantage of this short halt, while Gatsby, so to
speak, caught his breath, to clear this set of misconceptions
away.
It was a halt, too, in my association with his affairs.
For several weeks I didnt see him or hear his voice on the
phonemostly I was in New York, trotting around with
Jordan and trying to ingratiate myself with her senile aunt
but finally I went over to his house one Sunday afternoon.
I hadnt been there two minutes when somebody brought
Tom Buchanan in for a drink. I was startled, naturally, but
the really surprising thing was that it hadnt happened before.
They were a party of three on horsebackTom and a
man named Sloane and a pretty woman in a brown riding 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 109
habit who had been there previously.
Im delighted to see you, said Gatsby standing on his
porch. Im delighted that you dropped in.
As though they cared!
Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar. He walked
around the room quickly, ringing bells. Ill have something
to drink for you in just a minute.
He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was
there. But he would be uneasy anyhow until he had given
them something, realizing in a vague way that that was all
they came for. Mr. Sloane wanted nothing. A lemonade?
No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at all, thanks.
Im sorry
Did you have a nice ride?
Very good roads around here.
I suppose the automobiles
Yeah.
Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned to Tom
who had accepted the introduction as a stranger.
I believe weve met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan.
Oh, yes, said Tom, gruffly polite but obviously not remembering.
So we did. I remember very well.
About two weeks ago.
Thats right. You were with Nick here.
I know your wife, continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.
That so?
Tom turned to me.
You live near here, Nick?
110 The Great Gatsby
Next door.
That so?
Mr. Sloane didnt enter into the conversation but lounged
back haughtily in his chair; the woman said nothing eitheruntil
unexpectedly, after two highballs, she became
cordial.
Well all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby, she
suggested. What do you say?
Certainly. Id be delighted to have you.
Be ver nice, said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. Well
think ought to be starting home.
Please dont hurry, Gatsby urged them. He had control
of himself now and he wanted to see more of Tom. Why
dont youwhy dont you stay for supper? I wouldnt be surprised
if some other people dropped in from New York.
You come to supper with ME, said the lady enthusiastically.
Both of you.
This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.
Come along, he saidbut to her only.
I mean it, she insisted. Id love to have you. Lots of
room.
Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go and
he didnt see that Mr. Sloane had determined he shouldnt.
Im afraid I wont be able to, I said.
Well, you come, she urged, concentrating on Gatsby.
Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her ear.
We wont be late if we start now, she insisted aloud.
I havent got a horse, said Gatsby. I used to ride in the
army but Ive never bought a horse. Ill have to follow you in 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 111
my car. Excuse me for just a minute.
The rest of us walked out on the porch, where Sloane and
the lady began an impassioned conversation aside.
My God, I believe the mans coming, said Tom. Doesnt
he know she doesnt want him?
She says she does want him.
She has a big dinner party and he wont know a soul
there. He frowned. I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy.
By God, I may be old-fashioned in my ideas, but women
run around too much these days to suit me. They meet all
kinds of crazy fish.
Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps
and mounted their horses.
Come on, said Mr. Sloane to Tom, were late. Weve
got to go. And then to me: Tell him we couldnt wait, will
you?
Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool
nod and they trotted quickly down the drive, disappearing
under the August foliage just as Gatsby with hat and light
overcoat in hand came out the front door.
Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisys running around
alone, for on the following Saturday night he came with her
to Gatsbys party. Perhaps his presence gave the evening
its peculiar quality of oppressivenessit stands out in my
memory from Gatsbys other parties that summer. There
were the same people, or at least the same sort of people,
the same profusion of champagne, the same many-colored,
many-keyed commotion, but I felt an unpleasantness in the
air, a pervading harshness that hadnt been there before. 
112 The Great Gatsby
Or perhaps I had merely grown used to it, grown to accept
West Egg as a world complete in itself, with its own standards
and its own great figures, second to nothing because
it had no consciousness of being so, and now I was looking
at it again, through Daisys eyes. It is invariably saddening
to look through new eyes at things upon which you have expended
your own powers of adjustment.
They arrived at twilight and as we strolled out among the
sparkling hundreds Daisys voice was playing murmurous
tricks in her throat.
These things excite me SO, she whispered. If you want
to kiss me any time during the evening, Nick, just let me
know and Ill be glad to arrange it for you. Just mention my
name. Or present a green card. Im giving out green
Look around, suggested Gatsby.
Im looking around. Im having a marvelous
You must see the faces of many people youve heard
about.
Toms arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.
We dont go around very much, he said. In fact I was
just thinking I dont know a soul here.
Perhaps you know that lady. Gatsby indicated a gorgeous,
scarcely human orchid of a woman who sat in state
under a white plum tree. Tom and Daisy stared, with that
peculiarly unreal feeling that accompanies the recognition
of a hitherto ghostly celebrity of the movies.
Shes lovely, said Daisy.
The man bending over her is her director.
He took them ceremoniously from group to group:
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 113
Mrs. Buchanan  and Mr. Buchanan After an instants
hesitation he added: the polo player.
Oh no, objected Tom quickly, Not me.
But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby for Tom remained
the polo player for the rest of the evening.
Ive never met so many celebrities! Daisy exclaimed. I
liked that manwhat was his name?with the sort of blue
nose.
Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small producer.
Well, I liked him anyhow.
Id a little rather not be the polo player, said Tom pleasantly,
Id rather look at all these famous people inin
oblivion.
Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being surprised
by his graceful, conservative fox-trotI had never seen him
dance before. Then they sauntered over to my house and sat
on the steps for half an hour while at her request I remained
watchfully in the garden: In case theres a fire or a flood,
she explained, or any act of God.
Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down
to supper together. Do you mind if I eat with some people
over here? he said. A fellows getting off some funny stuff.
Go ahead, answered Daisy genially, And if you want
to take down any addresses heres my little gold pencil.
She looked around after a moment and told me the girl was
common but pretty, and I knew that except for the half
hour shed been alone with Gatsby she wasnt having a good
time.
114 The Great Gatsby
We were at a particularly tipsy table. That was my fault
Gatsby had been called to the phone and Id enjoyed these
same people only two weeks before. But what had amused
me then turned septic on the air now.
How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?
The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump
against my shoulder. At this inquiry she sat up and opened
her eyes.
Wha?
A massive and lethargic woman, who had been urging
Daisy to play golf with her at the local club tomorrow, spoke
in Miss Baedekers defence:
Oh, shes all right now. When shes had five or six cocktails
she always starts screaming like that. I tell her she
ought to leave it alone.
I do leave it alone, affirmed the accused hollowly.
We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: Theres
somebody that needs your help, Doc. 
Shes much obliged, Im sure, said another friend, without
gratitude. But you got her dress all wet when you stuck
her head in the pool.
Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool, mumbled
Miss Baedeker. They almost drowned me once over in
New Jersey.
Then you ought to leave it alone, countered Doctor Civet.
Speak for yourself! cried Miss Baedeker violently. Your
hand shakes. I wouldnt let you operate on me!
It was like that. Almost the last thing I remember was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 115
standing with Daisy and watching the moving picture director
and his Star. They were still under the white plum
tree and their faces were touching except for a pale thin ray
of moonlight between. It occurred to me that he had been
very slowly bending toward her all evening to attain this
proximity, and even while I watched I saw him stoop one
ultimate degree and kiss at her cheek.
I like her, said Daisy, I think shes lovely.
But the rest offended herand inarguably, because it
wasnt a gesture but an emotion. She was appalled by West
Egg, this unprecedented place that Broadway had begotten
upon a Long Island fishing villageappalled by its raw
vigor that chafed under the old euphemisms and by the too
obtrusive fate that herded its inhabitants along a short cut
from nothing to nothing. She saw something awful in the
very simplicity she failed to understand.
I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for
their car. It was dark here in front: only the bright door
sent ten square feet of light volleying out into the soft black
morning. Sometimes a shadow moved against a dressingroom
blind above, gave way to another shadow, an indefinite
procession of shadows, who rouged and powdered in an invisible
glass.
Who is this Gatsby anyhow? demanded Tom suddenly.
Some big bootlegger?
Whered you hear that? I inquired.
I didnt hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich
people are just big bootleggers, you know.
Not Gatsby, I said shortly.
116 The Great Gatsby
He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of the drive
crunched under his feet.
Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this
menagerie together.
A breeze stirred the grey haze of Daisys fur collar.
At least theyre more interesting than the people we
know, she said with an effort.
You didnt look so interested.
Well, I was.
Tom laughed and turned to me.
Did you notice Daisys face when that girl asked her to
put her under a cold shower?
Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic
whisper, bringing out a meaning in each word that it
had never had before and would never have again. When
the melody rose, her voice broke up sweetly, following it, in
a way contralto voices have, and each change tipped out a
little of her warm human magic upon the air.
Lots of people come who havent been invited, she said
suddenly. That girl hadnt been invited. They simply force
their way in and hes too polite to object.
Id like to know who he is and what he does, insisted
Tom. And I think Ill make a point of finding out.
I can tell you right now, she answered. He owned some
drug stores, a lot of drug stores. He built them up himself.
The dilatory limousine came rolling up the drive.
Good night, Nick, said Daisy.
Her glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps
where Three oClock in the Morning, a neat, sad little waltz 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 117
of that year, was drifting out the open door. After all, in the
very casualness of Gatsbys party there were romantic possibilities
totally absent from her world. What was it up there
in the song that seemed to be calling her back inside? What
would happen now in the dim incalculable hours? Perhaps
some unbelievable guest would arrive, a person infinitely
rare and to be marvelled at, some authentically radiant
young girl who with one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment
of magical encounter, would blot out those five years
of unwavering devotion.
I stayed late that night. Gatsby asked me to wait until he
was free and I lingered in the garden until the inevitable
swimming party had run up, chilled and exalted, from the
black beach, until the lights were extinguished in the guest
rooms overhead. When he came down the steps at last the
tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face, and his
eyes were bright and tired.
She didnt like it, he said immediately.
Of course she did.
She didnt like it, he insisted. She didnt have a good
time.
He was silent and I guessed at his unutterable depression.
I feel far away from her, he said. Its hard to make her
understand.
You mean about the dance?
The dance? He dismissed all the dances he had given
with a snap of his fingers. Old sport, the dance is unimportant.
118 The Great Gatsby
He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go
to Tom and say: I never loved you. After she had obliterated
three years with that sentence they could decide upon
the more practical measures to be taken. One of them was
that, after she was free, they were to go back to Louisville
and be married from her housejust as if it were five years
ago.
And she doesnt understand, he said. She used to be
able to understand. Wed sit for hours
He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate
path of fruit rinds and discarded favors and crushed flowers.
I wouldnt ask too much of her, I ventured. You cant
repeat the past.
Cant repeat the past? he cried incredulously. Why of
course you can!
He looked around him wildly, as if the past were lurking
here in the shadow of his house, just out of reach of his
hand.
Im going to fix everything just the way it was before, he
said, nodding determinedly. Shell see.
He talked a lot about the past and I gathered that he
wanted to recover something, some idea of himself perhaps,
that had gone into loving Daisy. His life had been confused
and disordered since then, but if he could once return to a
certain starting place and go over it all slowly, he could find
out what that thing was.
 One autumn night, five years before, they had been
walking down the street when the leaves were falling, and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 119
they came to a place where there were no trees and the sidewalk
was white with moonlight. They stopped here and
turned toward each other. Now it was a cool night with that
mysterious excitement in it which comes at the two changes
of the year. The quiet lights in the houses were humming
out into the darkness and there was a stir and bustle among
the stars. Out of the corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the
blocks of the sidewalk really formed a ladder and mounted
to a secret place above the treeshe could climb to it, if he
climbed alone, and once there he could suck on the pap of
life, gulp down the incomparable milk of wonder.
His heart beat faster and faster as Daisys white face came
up to his own. He knew that when he kissed this girl, and
forever wed his unutterable visions to her perishable breath,
his mind would never romp again like the mind of God. So
he waited, listening for a moment longer to the tuning fork
that had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her. At his
lips touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the incarnation
was complete.
Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality,
I was reminded of somethingan elusive
rhythm, a fragment of lost words, that I had heard somewhere
a long time ago. For a moment a phrase tried to take
shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb mans, as
though there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of
startled air. But they made no sound and what I had almost
remembered was uncommunicable forever.
120 The Great Gatsby
Chapter 7
I
t was when curiosity about Gatsby was at its highest
that the lights in his house failed to go on one Saturday
nightand, as obscurely as it had begun, his career as Trimalchio
was over.
Only gradually did I become aware that the automobiles
which turned expectantly into his drive stayed for just a
minute and then drove sulkily away. Wondering if he were
sick I went over to find outan unfamiliar butler with a villainous
face squinted at me suspiciously from the door.
Is Mr. Gatsby sick?
Nope. After a pause he added sir in a dilatory, grudging
way.
I hadnt seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell
him Mr. Carraway came over.
Who? he demanded rudely.
Carraway.
Carraway. All right, Ill tell him. Abruptly he slammed
the door.
My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every
servant in his house a week ago and replaced them with
half a dozen others, who never went into West Egg Village
to be bribed by the tradesmen, but ordered moderate supplies
over the telephone. The grocery boy reported that the
kitchen looked like a pigsty, and the general opinion in the 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 121
village was that the new people werent servants at all.
Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.
Going away? I inquired.
No, old sport.
I hear you fired all your servants.
I wanted somebody who wouldnt gossip. Daisy comes
over quite oftenin the afternoons.
So the whole caravansary had fallen in like a card house
at the disapproval in her eyes.
Theyre some people Wolfshiem wanted to do something
for. Theyre all brothers and sisters. They used to run
a small hotel.
I see.
He was calling up at Daisys requestwould I come to
lunch at her house tomorrow? Miss Baker would be there.
Half an hour later Daisy herself telephoned and seemed relieved
to find that I was coming. Something was up. And
yet I couldnt believe that they would choose this occasion
for a sceneespecially for the rather harrowing scene that
Gatsby had outlined in the garden.
The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the
warmest, of the summer. As my train emerged from the
tunnel into sunlight, only the hot whistles of the National
Biscuit Company broke the simmering hush at noon. The
straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of combustion;
the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into
her white shirtwaist, and then, as her newspaper dampened
under her fingers, lapsed despairingly into deep heat with a
desolate cry. Her pocket-book slapped to the floor.
122 The Great Gatsby
Oh, my! she gasped.
I picked it up with a weary bend and handed it back to
her, holding it at arms length and by the extreme tip of the
corners to indicate that I had no designs upon itbut every
one near by, including the woman, suspected me just
the same.
Hot! said the conductor to familiar faces. Some weather!
Hot! Hot! Hot! Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it
 ?
My commutation ticket came back to me with a dark
stain from his hand. That any one should care in this heat
whose flushed lips he kissed, whose head made damp the
pajama pocket over his heart!
 Through the hall of the Buchanans house blew a faint
wind, carrying the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby
and me as we waited at the door.
The masters body! roared the butler into the mouthpiece.
Im sorry, madame, but we cant furnish itits far
too hot to touch this noon!
What he really said was: Yes  yes  Ill see.
He set down the receiver and came toward us, glistening
slightly, to take our stiff straw hats.
Madame expects you in the salon! he cried, needlessly
indicating the direction. In this heat every extra gesture
was an affront to the common store of life.
The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and
cool. Daisy and Jordan lay upon an enormous couch, like
silver idols, weighing down their own white dresses against
the singing breeze of the fans.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 123
We cant move, they said together.
Jordans fingers, powdered white over their tan, rested
for a moment in mine.
And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete? I inquired.
Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled, husky,
at the hall telephone.
Gatsby stood in the center of the crimson carpet and
gazed around with fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and
laughed, her sweet, exciting laugh; a tiny gust of powder
rose from her bosom into the air.
The rumor is, whispered Jordan, that thats Toms girl
on the telephone.
We were silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoyance.
Very well, then, I wont sell you the car at all.
Im under no obligations to you at all. And as for your
bothering me about it at lunch time I wont stand that at
all!
Holding down the receiver, said Daisy cynically.
No, hes not, I assured her. Its a bona fide deal. I happen
to know about it.
Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space for a moment
with his thick body, and hurried into the room.
Mr. Gatsby! He put out his broad, flat hand with wellconcealed
dislike. Im glad to see you, sir. Nick.
Make us a cold drink, cried Daisy.
As he left the room again she got up and went over
to Gatsby and pulled his face down kissing him on the
mouth.
You know I love you, she murmured.
124 The Great Gatsby
You forget theres a lady present, said Jordan.
Daisy looked around doubtfully.
You kiss Nick too.
What a low, vulgar girl!
I dont care! cried Daisy and began to clog on the brick
fireplace. Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily
on the couch just as a freshly laundered nurse leading a
little girl came into the room.
Bles-sed pre-cious, she crooned, holding out her arms.
Come to your own mother that loves you.
The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the
room and rooted shyly into her mothers dress.
The Bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your
old yellowy hair? Stand up now, and say How-de-do.
Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant
hand. Afterward he kept looking at the child with
surprise. I dont think he had ever really believed in its existence
before.
I got dressed before luncheon, said the child, turning
eagerly to Daisy.
Thats because your mother wanted to show you off. Her
face bent into the single wrinkle of the small white neck.
You dream, you. You absolute little dream.
Yes, admitted the child calmly. Aunt Jordans got on a
white dress too.
How do you like mothers friends? Daisy turned her
around so that she faced Gatsby. Do you think theyre pretty?
Wheres Daddy?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 125
She doesnt look like her father, explained Daisy. She
looks like me. Shes got my hair and shape of the face.
Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took a step forward
and held out her hand.
Come, Pammy.
Goodbye, sweetheart!
With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined
child held to her nurses hand and was pulled out the door,
just as Tom came back, preceding four gin rickeys that
clicked full of ice.
Gatsby took up his drink.
They certainly look cool, he said, with visible tension.
We drank in long greedy swallows.
I read somewhere that the suns getting hotter every
year, said Tom genially. It seems that pretty soon the
earths going to fall into the sunor wait a minuteits just
the oppositethe suns getting colder every year.
Come outside, he suggested to Gatsby, Id like you to
have a look at the place.
I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound,
stagnant in the heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward
the fresher sea. Gatsbys eyes followed it momentarily; he
raised his hand and pointed across the bay.
Im right across from you.
So you are.
Our eyes lifted over the rosebeds and the hot lawn and
the weedy refuse of the dog days along shore. Slowly the
white wings of the boat moved against the blue cool limit of
the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped ocean and the abounding 
126 The Great Gatsby
blessed isles.
Theres sport for you, said Tom, nodding. Id like to be
out there with him for about an hour.
We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened, too,
against the heat, and drank down nervous gayety with the
cold ale.
Whatll we do with ourselves this afternoon, cried Daisy,
and the day after that, and the next thirty years?
Dont be morbid, Jordan said. Life starts all over again
when it gets crisp in the fall.
But its so hot, insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, And
everythings so confused. Lets all go to town!
Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against
it, moulding its senselessness into forms.
Ive heard of making a garage out of a stable, Tom was
saying to Gatsby, but Im the first man who ever made a
stable out of a garage.
Who wants to go to town? demanded Daisy insistently.
Gatsbys eyes floated toward her. Ah, she cried, you look
so cool.
Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other,
alone in space. With an effort she glanced down at the table.
You always look so cool, she repeated.
She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan
saw. He was astounded. His mouth opened a little and he
looked at Gatsby and then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized
her as some one he knew a long time ago.
You resemble the advertisement of the man, she went on 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 127
innocently. You know the advertisement of the man
All right, broke in Tom quickly, Im perfectly willing to
go to town. Come onwere all going to town.
He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his
wife. No one moved.
Come on! His temper cracked a little. Whats the matter,
anyhow? If were going to town lets start.
His hand, trembling with his effort at self control, bore
to his lips the last of his glass of ale. Daisys voice got us to
our feet and out on to the blazing gravel drive.
Are we just going to go? she objected. Like this? Arent
we going to let any one smoke a cigarette first?
Everybody smoked all through lunch.
Oh, lets have fun, she begged him. Its too hot to fuss.
He didnt answer.
Have it your own way, she said. Come on, Jordan.
They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood
there shuffling the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve
of the moon hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby
started to speak, changed his mind, but not before Tom
wheeled and faced him expectantly.
Have you got your stables here? asked Gatsby with an
effort.
About a quarter of a mile down the road.
Oh.
A pause.
I dont see the idea of going to town, broke out Tom savagely.
Women get these notions in their heads
Shall we take anything to drink? called Daisy from an 
128 The Great Gatsby
upper window.
Ill get some whiskey, answered Tom. He went inside.
Gatsby turned to me rigidly:
I cant say anything in his house, old sport.
Shes got an indiscreet voice, I remarked. Its full of

I hesitated.
Her voice is full of money, he said suddenly.
That was it. Id never understood before. It was full of
moneythat was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell
in it, the jingle of it, the cymbals song of it. High in a
white palace the kings daughter, the golden girl.
Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in
a towel, followed by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight
hats of metallic cloth and carrying light capes over their
arms.
Shall we all go in my car? suggested Gatsby. He felt the
hot, green leather of the seat. I ought to have left it in the
shade.
Is it standard shift? demanded Tom.
Yes.
Well, you take my coup and let me drive your car to
town.
The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.
I dont think theres much gas, he objected.
Plenty of gas, said Tom boisterously. He looked at the
gauge. And if it runs out I can stop at a drug store. You can
buy anything at a drug store nowadays.
A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Dai-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 129
sy looked at Tom frowning and an indefinable expression,
at once definitely unfamiliar and vaguely recognizable, as if
I had only heard it described in words, passed over Gatsbys
face.
Come on, Daisy, said Tom, pressing her with his hand
toward Gatsbys car. Ill take you in this circus wagon.
He opened the door but she moved out from the circle
of his arm.
You take Nick and Jordan. Well follow you in the coup.
She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her
hand. Jordan and Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsbys
car, Tom pushed the unfamiliar gears tentatively and
we shot off into the oppressive heat leaving them out of sight
behind.
Did you see that? demanded Tom.
See what?
He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must
have known all along.
You think Im pretty dumb, dont you? he suggested.
Perhaps I am, but I have aalmost a second sight, sometimes,
that tells me what to do. Maybe you dont believe
that, but science
He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him,
pulled him back from the edge of the theoretical abyss.
Ive made a small investigation of this fellow, he continued.
I could have gone deeper if Id known
Do you mean youve been to a medium? inquired Jordan
humorously.
130 The Great Gatsby
What? Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. A medium?
About Gatsby.
About Gatsby! No, I havent. I said Id been making a
small investigation of his past.
And you found he was an Oxford man, said Jordan
helpfully.
An Oxford man! He was incredulous. Like hell he is!
He wears a pink suit.
Nevertheless hes an Oxford man.
Oxford, New Mexico, snorted Tom contemptuously, or
something like that.
Listen, Tom. If youre such a snob, why did you invite
him to lunch? demanded Jordan crossly.
Daisy invited him; she knew him before we were marriedGod
knows where!
We were all irritable now with the fading ale and, aware
of it, we drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J.
Eckleburgs faded eyes came into sight down the road, I remembered
Gatsbys caution about gasoline.
Weve got enough to get us to town, said Tom.
But theres a garage right here, objected Jordan. I dont
want to get stalled in this baking heat.
Tom threw on both brakes impatiently and we slid to an
abrupt dusty stop under Wilsons sign. After a moment the
proprietor emerged from the interior of his establishment
and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.
Lets have some gas! cried Tom roughly. What do you
think we stopped forto admire the view?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 131
Im sick, said Wilson without moving. I been sick all
day.
Whats the matter?
Im all run down.
Well, shall I help myself? Tom demanded. You sounded
well enough on the phone.
With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the
doorway and, breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the
tank. In the sunlight his face was green.
I didnt mean to interrupt your lunch, he said. But I
need money pretty bad and I was wondering what you were
going to do with your old car.
How do you like this one? inquired Tom. I bought it
last week.
Its a nice yellow one, said Wilson, as he strained at the
handle.
Like to buy it?
Big chance, Wilson smiled faintly. No, but I could make
some money on the other.
What do you want money for, all of a sudden?
Ive been here too long. I want to get away. My wife and
I want to go west.
Your wife does! exclaimed Tom, startled.
Shes been talking about it for ten years. He rested for
a moment against the pump, shading his eyes. And now
shes going whether she wants to or not. Im going to get
her away.
The coup flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the
flash of a waving hand.
132 The Great Gatsby
What do I owe you? demanded Tom harshly.
I just got wised up to something funny the last two days,
remarked Wilson. Thats why I want to get away. Thats why
I been bothering you about the car.
What do I owe you?
Dollar twenty.
The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse
me and I had a bad moment there before I realized that so
far his suspicions hadnt alighted on Tom. He had discovered
that Myrtle had some sort of life apart from him in
another world and the shock had made him physically sick.
I stared at him and then at Tom, who had made a parallel
discovery less than an hour beforeand it occurred to me
that there was no difference between men, in intelligence or
race, so profound as the difference between the sick and the
well. Wilson was so sick that he looked guilty, unforgivably
guiltyas if he had just got some poor girl with child.
Ill let you have that car, said Tom. Ill send it over tomorrow
afternoon.
That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in
the broad glare of afternoon, and now I turned my head as
though I had been warned of something behind. Over the
ashheaps the giant eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg kept their
vigil but I perceived, after a moment, that other eyes were
regarding us with peculiar intensity from less than twenty
feet away.
In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had
been moved aside a little and Myrtle Wilson was peering
down at the car. So engrossed was she that she had no con-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 133
sciousness of being observed and one emotion after another
crept into her face like objects into a slowly developing picture.
Her expression was curiously familiarit was an
expression I had often seen on womens faces but on Myrtle
Wilsons face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable until
I realized that her eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed
not on Tom, but on Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his
wife.
There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple
mind, and as we drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips
of panic. His wife and his mistress, until an hour ago secure
and inviolate, were slipping precipitately from his control.
Instinct made him step on the accelerator with the double
purpose of overtaking Daisy and leaving Wilson behind,
and we sped along toward Astoria at fifty miles an hour,
until, among the spidery girders of the elevated, we came in
sight of the easygoing blue coup.
Those big movies around Fiftieth Street are cool, suggested
Jordan. I love New York on summer afternoons
when every ones away. Theres something very sensuous
about itoverripe, as if all sorts of funny fruits were going
to fall into your hands.
The word sensuous had the effect of further disquieting
Tom but before he could invent a protest the coup came to
a stop and Daisy signalled us to draw up alongside.
Where are we going? she cried.
How about the movies?
Its so hot, she complained. You go. Well ride around
and meet you after. With an effort her wit rose faintly, 
134 The Great Gatsby
Well meet you on some corner. Ill be the man smoking
two cigarettes.
We cant argue about it here, Tom said impatiently as a
truck gave out a cursing whistle behind us. You follow me
to the south side of Central Park, in front of the Plaza.
Several times he turned his head and looked back for
their car, and if the traffic delayed them he slowed up until
they came into sight. I think he was afraid they would dart
down a side street and out of his life forever.
But they didnt. And we all took the less explicable step
of engaging the parlor of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.
The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by
herding us into that room eludes me, though I have a sharp
physical memory that, in the course of it, my underwear
kept climbing like a damp snake around my legs and intermittent
beads of sweat raced cool across my back. The
notion originated with Daisys suggestion that we hire five
bathrooms and take cold baths, and then assumed more
tangible form as a place to have a mint julep. Each of us
said over and over that it was a crazy ideawe all talked at
once to a baffled clerk and thought, or pretended to think,
that we were being very funny.
The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already
four oclock, opening the windows admitted only a
gust of hot shrubbery from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror
and stood with her back to us, fixing her hair.
Its a swell suite, whispered Jordan respectfully and every
one laughed.
Open another window, commanded Daisy, without 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 135
turning around.
There arent any more.
Well, wed better telephone for an axe
The thing to do is to forget about the heat, said Tom impatiently.
You make it ten times worse by crabbing about
it.
He unrolled the bottle of whiskey from the towel and put
it on the table.
Why not let her alone, old sport? remarked Gatsby.
Youre the one that wanted to come to town.
There was a moment of silence. The telephone book
slipped from its nail and splashed to the floor, whereupon
Jordan whispered Excuse mebut this time no one
laughed.
Ill pick it up, I offered.
Ive got it. Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered
Hum! in an interested way, and tossed the book on
a chair.
Thats a great expression of yours, isnt it? said Tom
sharply.
What is?
All this old sport business. Whered you pick that up?
Now see here, Tom, said Daisy, turning around from
the mirror, if youre going to make personal remarks I
wont stay here a minute. Call up and order some ice for the
mint julep.
As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded
into sound and we were listening to the portentous
chords of Mendelssohns Wedding March from the ball-
136 The Great Gatsby
room below.
Imagine marrying anybody in this heat! cried Jordan
dismally.
StillI was married in the middle of June, Daisy remembered,
Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who
was it fainted, Tom?
Biloxi, he answered shortly.
A man named Biloxi. Blocks Biloxi, and he made boxesthats
a factand he was from Biloxi, Tennessee.
They carried him into my house, appended Jordan,
because we lived just two doors from the church. And he
stayed three weeks, until Daddy told him he had to get out.
The day after he left Daddy died. After a moment she added
as if she might have sounded irreverent, There wasnt any
connection.
I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis, I remarked.
That was his cousin. I knew his whole family history
before he left. He gave me an aluminum putter that I use
today.
The music had died down as the ceremony began and
now a long cheer floated in at the window, followed by intermittent
cries of Yeaeaea! and finally by a burst of
jazz as the dancing began.
Were getting old, said Daisy. If we were young wed
rise and dance.
Remember Biloxi, Jordan warned her. Whered you
know him, Tom?
Biloxi? He concentrated with an effort. I didnt know 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 137
him. He was a friend of Daisys.
He was not, she denied. Id never seen him before. He
came down in the private car.
Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louisville.
Asa Bird brought him around at the last minute and
asked if we had room for him.
Jordan smiled.
He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he
was president of your class at Yale.
Tom and I looked at each other blankly.
BilOxi?
First place, we didnt have any president
Gatsbys foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed
him suddenly.
By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand youre an Oxford
man.
Not exactly.
Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford.
YesI went there.
A pause. Then Toms voice, incredulous and insulting:
You must have gone there about the time Biloxi went to
New Haven.
Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with
crushed mint and ice but the silence was unbroken by his
Thank you and the soft closing of the door. This tremendous
detail was to be cleared up at last.
I told you I went there, said Gatsby.
I heard you, but Id like to know when.
It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months. 
138 The Great Gatsby
Thats why I cant really call myself an Oxford man.
Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief.
But we were all looking at Gatsby.
It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers
after the Armistice, he continued. We could go to any of
the universities in England or France.
I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one
of those renewals of complete faith in him that Id experienced
before.
Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.
Open the whiskey, Tom, she ordered. And Ill make you
a mint julep. Then you wont seem so stupid to yourself.
Look at the mint!
Wait a minute, snapped Tom, I want to ask Mr. Gatsby
one more question.
Go on, Gatsby said politely.
What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house
anyhow?
They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.
He isnt causing a row. Daisy looked desperately from
one to the other. Youre causing a row. Please have a little
self control.
Self control! repeated Tom incredulously. I suppose the
latest thing is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere
make love to your wife. Well, if thats the idea you can count
me out. Nowadays people begin by sneering at family
life and family institutions and next theyll throw everything
overboard and have intermarriage between black and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 139
white.
Flushed with his impassioned gibberish he saw himself
standing alone on the last barrier of civilization.
Were all white here, murmured Jordan.
I know Im not very popular. I dont give big parties. I
suppose youve got to make your house into a pigsty in order
to have any friendsin the modern world.
Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh
whenever he opened his mouth. The transition from libertine
to prig was so complete.
Ive got something to tell YOU, old sport, began
Gatsby. But Daisy guessed at his intention.
Please dont! she interrupted helplessly. Please lets all
go home. Why dont we all go home?
Thats a good idea. I got up. Come on, Tom. Nobody
wants a drink.
I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me.
Your wife doesnt love you, said Gatsby. Shes never
loved you. She loves me.
You must be crazy! exclaimed Tom automatically.
Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.
She never loved you, do you hear? he cried. She only
married you because I was poor and she was tired of waiting
for me. It was a terrible mistake, but in her heart she
never loved any one except me!
At this point Jordan and I tried to go but Tom and Gatsby
insisted with competitive firmness that we remainas
though neither of them had anything to conceal and it
would be a privilege to partake vicariously of their emo-
140 The Great Gatsby
tions.
Sit down Daisy. Toms voice groped unsuccessfully for
the paternal note. Whats been going on? I want to hear all
about it.
I told you whats been going on, said Gatsby. Going on
for five yearsand you didnt know.
Tom turned to Daisy sharply.
Youve been seeing this fellow for five years?
Not seeing, said Gatsby. No, we couldnt meet. But both
of us loved each other all that time, old sport, and you didnt
know. I used to laugh sometimesbut there was no laughter
in his eyes, to think that you didnt know.
Ohthats all. Tom tapped his thick fingers together
like a clergyman and leaned back in his chair.
Youre crazy! he exploded. I cant speak about what
happened five years ago, because I didnt know Daisy then
and Ill be damned if I see how you got within a mile of her
unless you brought the groceries to the back door. But all
the rest of thats a God Damned lie. Daisy loved me when
she married me and she loves me now.
No, said Gatsby, shaking his head.
She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets
foolish ideas in her head and doesnt know what shes doing.
He nodded sagely. And whats more, I love Daisy too.
Once in a while I go off on a spree and make a fool of myself,
but I always come back, and in my heart I love her all
the time.
Youre revolting, said Daisy. She turned to me, and her
voice, dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrill-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 141
ing scorn: Do you know why we left Chicago? Im surprised
that they didnt treat you to the story of that little spree.
Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.
Daisy, thats all over now, he said earnestly. It doesnt
matter any more. Just tell him the truththat you never
loved himand its all wiped out forever.
She looked at him blindly. Why,how could I love
himpossibly?
You never loved him.
She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort
of appeal, as though she realized at last what she was doingand
as though she had never, all along, intended doing
anything at all. But it was done now. It was too late.
I never loved him, she said, with perceptible reluctance.
Not at Kapiolani? demanded Tom suddenly.
No.
From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating
chords were drifting up on hot waves of air.
Not that day I carried you down from the Punch Bowl to
keep your shoes dry? There was a husky tenderness in his
tone.  Daisy?
Please dont. Her voice was cold, but the rancour was
gone from it. She looked at Gatsby. There, Jay, she said
but her hand as she tried to light a cigarette was trembling.
Suddenly she threw the cigarette and the burning match on
the carpet.
Oh, you want too much! she cried to Gatsby. I love you
nowisnt that enough? I cant help whats past. She began 
142 The Great Gatsby
to sob helplessly. I did love him oncebut I loved you too.
Gatsbys eyes opened and closed.
You loved me TOO? he repeated.
Even thats a lie, said Tom savagely. She didnt know
you were alive. Why,therere things between Daisy and
me that youll never know, things that neither of us can ever
forget.
The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.
I want to speak to Daisy alone, he insisted. Shes all excited
now
Even alone I cant say I never loved Tom, she admitted
in a pitiful voice. It wouldnt be true.
Of course it wouldnt, agreed Tom.
She turned to her husband.
As if it mattered to you, she said.
Of course it matters. Im going to take better care of you
from now on.
You dont understand, said Gatsby, with a touch of panic.
Youre not going to take care of her any more.
Im not? Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He
could afford to control himself now. Whys that?
Daisys leaving you.
Nonsense.
I am, though, she said with a visible effort.
Shes not leaving me! Toms words suddenly leaned
down over Gatsby. Certainly not for a common swindler
whod have to steal the ring he put on her finger.
I wont stand this! cried Daisy. Oh, please lets get out.
Who are you, anyhow? broke out Tom. Youre one of 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 143
that bunch that hangs around with Meyer Wolfshiemthat
much I happen to know. Ive made a little investigation into
your affairsand Ill carry it further tomorrow.
You can suit yourself about that, old sport. said Gatsby
steadily.
I found out what your drug stores were. He turned to
us and spoke rapidly. He and this Wolfshiem bought up a
lot of side-street drug stores here and in Chicago and sold
grain alcohol over the counter. Thats one of his little stunts.
I picked him for a bootlegger the first time I saw him and I
wasnt far wrong.
What about it? said Gatsby politely. I guess your friend
Walter Chase wasnt too proud to come in on it.
And you left him in the lurch, didnt you? You let him go
to jail for a month over in New Jersey. God! You ought to
hear Walter on the subject of YOU.
He came to us dead broke. He was very glad to pick up
some money, old sport.
Dont you call me old sport! cried Tom. Gatsby said
nothing. Walter could have you up on the betting laws too,
but Wolfshiem scared him into shutting his mouth.
That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in
Gatsbys face.
That drug store business was just small change, continued
Tom slowly, but youve got something on now that
Walters afraid to tell me about.
I glanced at Daisy who was staring terrified between
Gatsby and her husband and at Jordan who had begun to
balance an invisible but absorbing object on the tip of her 
144 The Great Gatsby
chin. Then I turned back to Gatsbyand was startled at
his expression. He lookedand this is said in all contempt
for the babbled slander of his gardenas if he had killed a
man. For a moment the set of his face could be described in
just that fantastic way.
It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying
everything, defending his name against accusations that
had not been made. But with every word she was drawing
further and further into herself, so he gave that up and only
the dead dream fought on as the afternoon slipped away,
trying to touch what was no longer tangible, struggling unhappily,
undespairingly, toward that lost voice across the
room.
The voice begged again to go.
PLEASE, Tom! I cant stand this any more.
Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever
courage she had had, were definitely gone.
You two start on home, Daisy, said Tom. In Mr. Gatsbys
car.
She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with
magnanimous scorn.
Go on. He wont annoy you. I think he realizes that his
presumptuous little flirtation is over.
They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made accidental,
isolated, like ghosts even from our pity.
After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the unopened
bottle of whiskey in the towel.
Want any of this stuff? Jordan?  Nick?
I didnt answer.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 145
Nick? He asked again.
What?
Want any?
No  I just remembered that todays my birthday.
I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous menacing
road of a new decade.
It was seven oclock when we got into the coup with him
and started for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting
and laughing, but his voice was as remote from Jordan
and me as the foreign clamor on the sidewalk or the tumult
of the elevated overhead. Human sympathy has its limits
and we were content to let all their tragic arguments fade
with the city lights behind. Thirtythe promise of a decade
of loneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinning
brief-case of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was
Jordan beside me who, unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to
carry well-forgotten dreams from age to age. As we passed
over the dark bridge her wan face fell lazily against my coats
shoulder and the formidable stroke of thirty died away with
the reassuring pressure of her hand.
So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.
The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside
the ashheaps was the principal witness at the inquest.
He had slept through the heat until after five, when he
strolled over to the garage and found George Wilson sick in
his officereally sick, pale as his own pale hair and shaking
all over. Michaelis advised him to go to bed but Wilson refused,
saying that hed miss a lot of business if he did. While 
146 The Great Gatsby
his neighbor was trying to persuade him a violent racket
broke out overhead.
Ive got my wife locked in up there, explained Wilson
calmly. Shes going to stay there till the day after tomorrow
and then were going to move away.
Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbors for
four years and Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of
such a statement. Generally he was one of these worn-out
men: when he wasnt working he sat on a chair in the doorway
and stared at the people and the cars that passed along
the road. When any one spoke to him he invariably laughed
in an agreeable, colorless way. He was his wifes man and
not his own.
So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened,
but Wilson wouldnt say a wordinstead he began
to throw curious, suspicious glances at his visitor and ask
him what hed been doing at certain times on certain days.
Just as the latter was getting uneasy some workmen came
past the door bound for his restaurant and Michaelis took
the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later.
But he didnt. He supposed he forgot to, thats all. When he
came outside again a little after seven he was reminded of
the conversation because he heard Mrs. Wilsons voice, loud
and scolding, downstairs in the garage.
Beat me! he heard her cry. Throw me down and beat
me, you dirty little coward!
A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her
hands and shouting; before he could move from his door
the business was over.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 147
The death car as the newspapers called it, didnt stop;
it came out of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically
for a moment and then disappeared around the next bend.
Michaelis wasnt even sure of its colorhe told the first policeman
that it was light green. The other car, the one going
toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards beyond,
and its driver hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life
violently extinguished, knelt in the road and mingled her
thick, dark blood with the dust.
Michaelis and this man reached her first but when they
had torn open her shirtwaist still damp with perspiration,
they saw that her left breast was swinging loose like a flap
and there was no need to listen for the heart beneath. The
mouth was wide open and ripped at the corners as though
she had choked a little in giving up the tremendous vitality
she had stored so long.
We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd
when we were still some distance away.
Wreck! said Tom. Thats good. Wilsonll have a little
business at last.
He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping
until, as we came nearer, the hushed intent faces of the
people at the garage door made him automatically put on
the brakes.
Well take a look, he said doubtfully, just a look.
I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued
incessantly from the garage, a sound which as we got
out of the coup and walked toward the door resolved itself
into the words Oh, my God! uttered over and over in 
148 The Great Gatsby
a gasping moan.
Theres some bad trouble here, said Tom excitedly.
He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of
heads into the garage which was lit only by a yellow light
in a swinging wire basket overhead. Then he made a harsh
sound in his throat and with a violent thrusting movement
of his powerful arms pushed his way through.
The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation;
it was a minute before I could see anything at
all. Then new arrivals disarranged the line and Jordan and I
were pushed suddenly inside.
Myrtle Wilsons body wrapped in a blanket and then
in another blanket as though she suffered from a chill in
the hot night lay on a work table by the wall and Tom,
with his back to us, was bending over it, motionless. Next
to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking down names
with much sweat and correction in a little book. At first I
couldnt find the source of the high, groaning words that
echoed clamorously through the bare garagethen I saw
Wilson standing on the raised threshold of his office, swaying
back and forth and holding to the doorposts with both
hands. Some man was talking to him in a low voice and
attempting from time to time to lay a hand on his shoulder,
but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would drop
slowly from the swinging light to the laden table by the wall
and then jerk back to the light again and he gave out incessantly
his high horrible call.
O, my Ga-od! O, my Ga-od! Oh, Ga-od! Oh, my Gaod!
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 149
Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and after staring
around the garage with glazed eyes addressed a mumbled
incoherent remark to the policeman.
M-a-v the policeman was saying, o
No,r corrected the man, M-a-v-r-o
Listen to me! muttered Tom fiercely.
r said the policeman, o
g
g He looked up as Toms broad hand fell sharply on
his shoulder. What you want, fella?
What happenedthats what I want to know!
Auto hit her. Insantly killed.
Instantly killed, repeated Tom, staring.
She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didnt even stopus
car.
There was two cars, said Michaelis, one comin, one
goin, see?
Going where? asked the policeman keenly.
One goin each way. Well, she His hand rose toward
the blankets but stopped half way and fell to his side, she
ran out there an the one comin from NYork knock right
into her goin thirty or forty miles an hour.
Whats the name of this place here? demanded the officer.
Hasnt got any name.
A pale, well-dressed Negro stepped near.
It was a yellow car, he said, big yellow car. New.
See the accident? asked the policeman.
No, but the car passed me down the road, going fastern 
150 The Great Gatsby
forty. Going fifty, sixty.
Come here and lets have your name. Look out now. I
want to get his name.
Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson
swaying in the office door, for suddenly a new theme
found voice among his gasping cries.
You dont have to tell me what kind of car it was! I know
what kind of car it was!
Watching Tom I saw the wad of muscle back of his
shoulder tighten under his coat. He walked quickly over to
Wilson and standing in front of him seized him firmly by
the upper arms.
Youve got to pull yourself together, he said with soothing
gruffness.
Wilsons eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes
and then would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom
held him upright.
Listen, said Tom, shaking him a little. I just got here a
minute ago, from New York. I was bringing you that coup
weve been talking about. That yellow car I was driving this
afternoon wasnt mine, do you hear? I havent seen it all afternoon.
Only the Negro and I were near enough to hear what he
said but the policeman caught something in the tone and
looked over with truculent eyes.
Whats all that? he demanded.
Im a friend of his. Tom turned his head but kept his
hands firm on Wilsons body. He says he knows the car that
did it. It was a yellow car.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 151
Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously
at Tom.
And what colors your car?
Its a blue car, a coup.
Weve come straight from New York, I said.
Some one who had been driving a little behind us confirmed
this and the policeman turned away.
Now, if youll let me have that name again correct
Picking up Wilson like a doll Tom carried him into the
office, set him down in a chair and came back.
If somebodyll come here and sit with him! he snapped
authoritatively. He watched while the two men standing
closest glanced at each other and went unwillingly into the
room. Then Tom shut the door on them and came down the
single step, his eyes avoiding the table. As he passed close to
me he whispered Lets get out.
Self consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking
the way, we pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing
a hurried doctor, case in hand, who had been sent for in
wild hope half an hour ago.
Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bendthen
his foot came down hard and the coup raced along through
the night. In a little while I heard a low husky sob and saw
that the tears were overflowing down his face.
The God Damn coward! he whimpered. He didnt even
stop his car.
The Buchanans house floated suddenly toward us
through the dark rustling trees. Tom stopped beside the
porch and looked up at the second floor where two win-
152 The Great Gatsby
dows bloomed with light among the vines.
Daisys home, he said. As we got out of the car he glanced
at me and frowned slightly.
I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. Theres
nothing we can do tonight.
A change had come over him and he spoke gravely, and
with decision. As we walked across the moonlight gravel to
the porch he disposed of the situation in a few brisk phrases.
Ill telephone for a taxi to take you home, and while
youre waiting you and Jordan better go in the kitchen
and have them get you some supperif you want any. He
opened the door. Come in.
No thanks. But Id be glad if youd order me the taxi. Ill
wait outside.
Jordan put her hand on my arm.
Wont you come in, Nick?
No thanks.
I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But
Jordan lingered for a moment more.
Its only half past nine, she said.
Id be damned if Id go in; Id had enough of all of them
for one day and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must
have seen something of this in my expression for she turned
abruptly away and ran up the porch steps into the house. I
sat down for a few minutes with my head in my hands, until
I heard the phone taken up inside and the butlers voice calling
a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from
the house intending to wait by the gate.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 153
I hadnt gone twenty yards when I heard my name and
Gatsby stepped from between two bushes into the path. I
must have felt pretty weird by that time because I could
think of nothing except the luminosity of his pink suit under
the moon.
What are you doing? I inquired.
Just standing here, old sport.
Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I
knew he was going to rob the house in a moment; I wouldnt
have been surprised to see sinister faces, the faces of Wolfshiems
people, behind him in the dark shrubbery.
Did you see any trouble on the road? he asked after a
minute.
Yes.
He hesitated.
Was she killed?
Yes.
I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. Its better that the
shock should all come at once. She stood it pretty well.
He spoke as if Daisys reaction was the only thing that
mattered.
I got to West Egg by a side road, he went on, and left the
car in my garage. I dont think anybody saw us but of course
I cant be sure.
I disliked him so much by this time that I didnt find it
necessary to tell him he was wrong.
Who was the woman? he inquired.
Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the garage.
How the devil did it happen?
154 The Great Gatsby
Well, I tried to swing the wheel He broke off, and
suddenly I guessed at the truth.
Was Daisy driving?
Yes, he said after a moment, but of course Ill say I was.
You see, when we left New York she was very nervous and
she thought it would steady her to driveand this woman
rushed out at us just as we were passing a car coming the
other way. It all happened in a minute but it seemed to me
that she wanted to speak to us, thought we were somebody
she knew. Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman
toward the other car, and then she lost her nerve and
turned back. The second my hand reached the wheel I felt
the shockit must have killed her instantly.
It ripped her open
Dont tell me, old sport. He winced. AnyhowDaisy
stepped on it. I tried to make her stop, but she couldnt so I
pulled on the emergency brake. Then she fell over into my
lap and I drove on.
Shell be all right tomorrow, he said presently. Im just
going to wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that
unpleasantness this afternoon. Shes locked herself into her
room and if he tries any brutality shes going to turn the
light out and on again.
He wont touch her, I said. Hes not thinking about
her.
I dont trust him, old sport.
How long are you going to wait?
All night if necessary. Anyhow till they all go to bed.
A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose Tom found 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 155
out that Daisy had been driving. He might think he saw a
connection in ithe might think anything. I looked at the
house: there were two or three bright windows downstairs
and the pink glow from Daisys room on the second floor.
You wait here, I said. Ill see if theres any sign of a commotion.
I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the
gravel softly and tiptoed up the veranda steps. The drawing-room
curtains were open, and I saw that the room was
empty. Crossing the porch where we had dined that June
night three months before I came to a small rectangle of
light which I guessed was the pantry window. The blind was
drawn but I found a rift at the sill.
Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other at the
kitchen table with a plate of cold fried chicken between
them and two bottles of ale. He was talking intently across
the table at her and in his earnestness his hand had fallen
upon and covered her own. Once in a while she looked up
at him and nodded in agreement.
They werent happy, and neither of them had touched the
chicken or the aleand yet they werent unhappy either.
There was an unmistakable air of natural intimacy about
the picture and anybody would have said that they were
conspiring together.
As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi feeling its
way along the dark road toward the house. Gatsby was waiting
where I had left him in the drive.
Is it all quiet up there? he asked anxiously.
Yes, its all quiet. I hesitated. Youd better come home 
156 The Great Gatsby
and get some sleep.
He shook his head.
I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night,
old sport.
He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back
eagerly to his scrutiny of the house, as though my presence
marred the sacredness of the vigil. So I walked away and left
him standing there in the moonlightwatching over nothing.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 157
Chapter 8
I couldnt sleep all night; a fog-horn was groaning incessantly
on the Sound, and I tossed half-sick between
grotesque reality and savage frightening dreams. Toward
dawn I heard a taxi go up Gatsbys drive and immediately
I jumped out of bed and began to dressI felt that I had
something to tell him, something to warn him about and
morning would be too late.
Crossing his lawn I saw that his front door was still open
and he was leaning against a table in the hall, heavy with
dejection or sleep.
Nothing happened, he said wanly. I waited, and about
four oclock she came to the window and stood there for a
minute and then turned out the light.
His house had never seemed so enormous to me as it did
that night when we hunted through the great rooms for cigarettes.
We pushed aside curtains that were like pavilions
and felt over innumerable feet of dark wall for electric light
switchesonce I tumbled with a sort of splash upon the
keys of a ghostly piano. There was an inexplicable amount
of dust everywhere and the rooms were musty as though
they hadnt been aired for many days. I found the humidor
on an unfamiliar table with two stale dry cigarettes inside.
Throwing open the French windows of the drawing-room
we sat smoking out into the darkness.
158 The Great Gatsby
You ought to go away, I said. Its pretty certain theyll
trace your car.
Go away NOW, old sport?
Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to Montreal.
He wouldnt consider it. He couldnt possibly leave Daisy
until he knew what she was going to do. He was clutching at
some last hope and I couldnt bear to shake him free.
It was this night that he told me the strange story of his
youth with Dan Codytold it to me because Jay Gatsby
had broken up like glass against Toms hard malice and the
long secret extravaganza was played out. I think that he
would have acknowledged anything, now, without reserve,
but he wanted to talk about Daisy.
She was the first nice girl he had ever known. In various
unrevealed capacities he had come in contact with such
people but always with indiscernible barbed wire between.
He found her excitingly desirable. He went to her house, at
first with other officers from Camp Taylor, then alone. It
amazed himhe had never been in such a beautiful house
before. But what gave it an air of breathless intensity was
that Daisy lived thereit was as casual a thing to her as his
tent out at camp was to him. There was a ripe mystery about
it, a hint of bedrooms upstairs more beautiful and cool than
other bedrooms, of gay and radiant activities taking place
through its corridors and of romances that were not musty
and laid away already in lavender but fresh and breathing
and redolent of this years shining motor cars and of dances
whose flowers were scarcely withered. It excited him too
that many men had already loved Daisyit increased her 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 159
value in his eyes. He felt their presence all about the house,
pervading the air with the shades and echoes of still vibrant
emotions.
But he knew that he was in Daisys house by a colossal
accident. However glorious might be his future as Jay Gatsby,
he was at present a penniless young man without a past,
and at any moment the invisible cloak of his uniform might
slip from his shoulders. So he made the most of his time. He
took what he could get, ravenously and unscrupulously
eventually he took Daisy one still October night, took her
because he had no real right to touch her hand.
He might have despised himself, for he had certainly
taken her under false pretenses. I dont mean that he had
traded on his phantom millions, but he had deliberately
given Daisy a sense of security; he let her believe that he was
a person from much the same stratum as herselfthat he
was fully able to take care of her. As a matter of fact he had
no such facilitieshe had no comfortable family standing
behind him and he was liable at the whim of an impersonal
government to be blown anywhere about the world.
But he didnt despise himself and it didnt turn out as he
had imagined. He had intended, probably, to take what he
could and gobut now he found that he had committed
himself to the following of a grail. He knew that Daisy was
extraordinary but he didnt realize just how extraordinary
a nice girl could be. She vanished into her rich house, into
her rich, full life, leaving Gatsbynothing. He felt married
to her, that was all.
When they met again two days later it was Gatsby who 
160 The Great Gatsby
was breathless, who was somehow betrayed. Her porch was
bright with the bought luxury of star-shine; the wicker of
the settee squeaked fashionably as she turned toward him
and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth. She had caught
a cold and it made her voice huskier and more charming
than ever and Gatsby was overwhelmingly aware of the
youth and mystery that wealth imprisons and preserves, of
the freshness of many clothes and of Daisy, gleaming like
silver, safe and proud above the hot struggles of the poor.
I cant describe to you how surprised I was to find out
I loved her, old sport. I even hoped for a while that shed
throw me over, but she didnt, because she was in love with
me too. She thought I knew a lot because I knew different
things from her. Well, there I was, way off my ambitions,
getting deeper in love every minute, and all of a sudden I
didnt care. What was the use of doing great things if I could
have a better time telling her what I was going to do?
On the last afternoon before he went abroad he sat with
Daisy in his arms for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall
day with fire in the room and her cheeks flushed. Now and
then she moved and he changed his arm a little and once
he kissed her dark shining hair. The afternoon had made
them tranquil for a while as if to give them a deep memory
for the long parting the next day promised. They had never
been closer in their month of love nor communicated more
profoundly one with another than when she brushed silent
lips against his coats shoulder or when he touched the end
of her fingers, gently, as though she were asleep.
He did extraordinarily well in the war. He was a captain 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 161
before he went to the front and following the Argonne battles
he got his majority and the command of the divisional
machine guns. After the Armistice he tried frantically to
get home but some complication or misunderstanding sent
him to Oxford instead. He was worried nowthere was a
quality of nervous despair in Daisys letters. She didnt see
why he couldnt come. She was feeling the pressure of the
world outside and she wanted to see him and feel his presence
beside her and be reassured that she was doing the
right thing after all.
For Daisy was young and her artificial world was redolent
of orchids and pleasant, cheerful snobbery and orchestras
which set the rhythm of the year, summing up the sadness
and suggestiveness of life in new tunes. All night the saxophones
wailed the hopeless comment of the Beale Street
Blues while a hundred pairs of golden and silver slippers
shuffled the shining dust. At the grey tea hour there were
always rooms that throbbed incessantly with this low sweet
fever, while fresh faces drifted here and there like rose petals
blown by the sad horns around the floor.
Through this twilight universe Daisy began to move
again with the season; suddenly she was again keeping half
a dozen dates a day with half a dozen men and drowsing
asleep at dawn with the beads and chiffon of an evening
dress tangled among dying orchids on the floor beside her
bed. And all the time something within her was crying for
a decision. She wanted her life shaped now, immediately
and the decision must be made by some forceof love, of
money, of unquestionable practicalitythat was close at 
162 The Great Gatsby
hand.
That force took shape in the middle of spring with the arrival
of Tom Buchanan. There was a wholesome bulkiness
about his person and his position and Daisy was flattered.
Doubtless there was a certain struggle and a certain relief.
The letter reached Gatsby while he was still at Oxford.
It was dawn now on Long Island and we went about opening
the rest of the windows downstairs, filling the house
with grey turning, gold turning light. The shadow of a tree
fell abruptly across the dew and ghostly birds began to sing
among the blue leaves. There was a slow pleasant movement
in the air, scarcely a wind, promising a cool lovely day.
I dont think she ever loved him. Gatsby turned around
from a window and looked at me challengingly. You must
remember, old sport, she was very excited this afternoon.
He told her those things in a way that frightened herthat
made it look as if I was some kind of cheap sharper. And the
result was she hardly knew what she was saying.
He sat down gloomily.
Of course she might have loved him, just for a minute,
when they were first marriedand loved me more even
then, do you see?
Suddenly he came out with a curious remark:
In any case, he said, it was just personal.
What could you make of that, except to suspect some
intensity in his conception of the affair that couldnt be
measured?
He came back from France when Tom and Daisy were
still on their wedding trip, and made a miserable but irre-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 163
sistible journey to Louisville on the last of his army pay. He
stayed there a week, walking the streets where their footsteps
had clicked together through the November night and
revisiting the out-of-the-way places to which they had driven
in her white car. Just as Daisys house had always seemed
to him more mysterious and gay than other houses so his
idea of the city itself, even though she was gone from it, was
pervaded with a melancholy beauty.
He left feeling that if he had searched harder he might
have found herthat he was leaving her behind. The daycoachhe
was penniless nowwas hot. He went out to the
open vestibule and sat down on a folding-chair, and the station
slid away and the backs of unfamiliar buildings moved
by. Then out into the spring fields, where a yellow trolley
raced them for a minute with people in it who might once
have seen the pale magic of her face along the casual street.
The track curved and now it was going away from the
sun which, as it sank lower, seemed to spread itself in benediction
over the vanishing city where she had drawn her
breath. He stretched out his hand desperately as if to snatch
only a wisp of air, to save a fragment of the spot that she had
made lovely for him. But it was all going by too fast now for
his blurred eyes and he knew that he had lost that part of it,
the freshest and the best, forever.
It was nine oclock when we finished breakfast and went
out on the porch. The night had made a sharp difference in
the weather and there was an autumn flavor in the air. The
gardener, the last one of Gatsbys former servants, came to
the foot of the steps.
164 The Great Gatsby
Im going to drain the pool today, Mr. Gatsby. Leavesll
start falling pretty soon and then theres always trouble
with the pipes.
Dont do it today, Gatsby answered. He turned to me
apologetically. You know, old sport, Ive never used that
pool all summer?
I looked at my watch and stood up.
Twelve minutes to my train.
I didnt want to go to the city. I wasnt worth a decent
stroke of work but it was more than thatI didnt want to
leave Gatsby. I missed that train, and then another, before I
could get myself away.
Ill call you up, I said finally.
Do, old sport.
Ill call you about noon.
We walked slowly down the steps.
I suppose Daisyll call too. He looked at me anxiously as
if he hoped Id corroborate this.
I suppose so.
Wellgoodbye.
We shook hands and I started away. Just before I reached
the hedge I remembered something and turned around.
Theyre a rotten crowd, I shouted across the lawn. Youre
worth the whole damn bunch put together.
Ive always been glad I said that. It was the only compliment
I ever gave him, because I disapproved of him from
beginning to end. First he nodded politely, and then his face
broke into that radiant and understanding smile, as if wed
been in ecstatic cahoots on that fact all the time. His gor-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 165
geous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot of color against
the white steps and I thought of the night when I first came
to his ancestral home three months before. The lawn and
drive had been crowded with the faces of those who guessed
at his corruptionand he had stood on those steps, concealing
his incorruptible dream, as he waved them goodbye.
I thanked him for his hospitality. We were always thanking
him for thatI and the others.
Goodbye, I called. I enjoyed breakfast, Gatsby.
Up in the city I tried for a while to list the quotations
on an interminable amount of stock, then I fell asleep in
my swivel-chair. Just before noon the phone woke me and I
started up with sweat breaking out on my forehead. It was
Jordan Baker; she often called me up at this hour because
the uncertainty of her own movements between hotels and
clubs and private houses made her hard to find in any other
way. Usually her voice came over the wire as something
fresh and cool as if a divot from a green golf links had come
sailing in at the office window but this morning it seemed
harsh and dry.
Ive left Daisys house, she said. Im at Hempstead and
Im going down to Southampton this afternoon.
Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisys house, but
the act annoyed me and her next remark made me rigid.
You werent so nice to me last night.
How could it have mattered then?
Silence for a moment. Then
HoweverI want to see you.
I want to see you too.
166 The Great Gatsby
Suppose I dont go to Southampton, and come into town
this afternoon?
NoI dont think this afternoon.
Very well.
Its impossible this afternoon. Various
We talked like that for a while and then abruptly we
werent talking any longer. I dont know which of us hung
up with a sharp click but I know I didnt care. I couldnt
have talked to her across a tea-table that day if I never talked
to her again in this world.
I called Gatsbys house a few minutes later, but the line
was busy. I tried four times; finally an exasperated central
told me the wire was being kept open for long distance
from Detroit. Taking out my time-table I drew a small circle
around the three-fifty train. Then I leaned back in my chair
and tried to think. It was just noon.
When I passed the ashheaps on the train that morning
I had crossed deliberately to the other side of the car. I suppose
thered be a curious crowd around there all day with
little boys searching for dark spots in the dust and some
garrulous man telling over and over what had happened
until it became less and less real even to him and he could
tell it no longer and Myrtle Wilsons tragic achievement was
forgotten. Now I want to go back a little and tell what happened
at the garage after we left there the night before.
They had difficulty in locating the sister, Catherine. She
must have broken her rule against drinking that night for
when she arrived she was stupid with liquor and unable to
understand that the ambulance had already gone to Flush-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 167
ing. When they convinced her of this she immediately
fainted as if that was the intolerable part of the affair. Someone
kind or curious took her in his car and drove her in the
wake of her sisters body.
Until long after midnight a changing crowd lapped up
against the front of the garage while George Wilson rocked
himself back and forth on the couch inside. For a while the
door of the office was open and everyone who came into the
garage glanced irresistibly through it. Finally someone said
it was a shame and closed the door. Michaelis and several
other men were with himfirst four or five men, later two
or three men. Still later Michaelis had to ask the last stranger
to wait there fifteen minutes longer while he went back to
his own place and made a pot of coffee. After that he stayed
there alone with Wilson until dawn.
About three oclock the quality of Wilsons incoherent
muttering changedhe grew quieter and began to talk
about the yellow car. He announced that he had a way of
finding out whom the yellow car belonged to, and then he
blurted out that a couple of months ago his wife had come
from the city with her face bruised and her nose swollen.
But when he heard himself say this, he flinched and
began to cry Oh, my God! again in his groaning voice. Michaelis
made a clumsy attempt to distract him.
How long have you been married, George? Come on
there, try and sit still a minute and answer my question.
How long have you been married?
Twelve years.
Ever had any children? Come on, George, sit stillI 
168 The Great Gatsby
asked you a question. Did you ever have any children?
The hard brown beetles kept thudding against the dull
light and whenever Michaelis heard a car go tearing along
the road outside it sounded to him like the car that hadnt
stopped a few hours before. He didnt like to go into the garage
because the work bench was stained where the body
had been lying so he moved uncomfortably around the officehe
knew every object in it before morningand from
time to time sat down beside Wilson trying to keep him
more quiet.
Have you got a church you go to sometimes, George?
Maybe even if you havent been there for a long time? Maybe
I could call up the church and get a priest to come over
and he could talk to you, see?
Dont belong to any.
You ought to have a church, George, for times like this.
You must have gone to church once. Didnt you get married
in a church? Listen, George, listen to me. Didnt you get
married in a church?
That was a long time ago.
The effort of answering broke the rhythm of his rocking
for a moment he was silent. Then the same half knowing,
half bewildered look came back into his faded eyes.
Look in the drawer there, he said, pointing at the desk.
Which drawer?
That drawerthat one.
Michaelis opened the drawer nearest his hand. There
was nothing in it but a small expensive dog leash made of
leather and braided silver. It was apparently new.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 169
This? he inquired, holding it up.
Wilson stared and nodded.
I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried to tell me about
it but I knew it was something funny.
You mean your wife bought it?
She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her bureau.
Michaelis didnt see anything odd in that and he gave
Wilson a dozen reasons why his wife might have bought the
dog leash. But conceivably Wilson had heard some of these
same explanations before, from Myrtle, because he began
saying Oh, my God! again in a whisperhis comforter left
several explanations in the air.
Then he killed her, said Wilson. His mouth dropped
open suddenly.
Who did?
I have a way of finding out.
Youre morbid, George, said his friend. This has been a
strain to you and you dont know what youre saying. Youd
better try and sit quiet till morning.
He murdered her.
It was an accident, George.
Wilson shook his head. His eyes narrowed and his mouth
widened slightly with the ghost of a superior Hm!
I know, he said definitely, Im one of these trusting fellas
and I dont think any harm to NObody, but when I get to
know a thing I know it. It was the man in that car. She ran
out to speak to him and he wouldnt stop.
Michaelis had seen this too but it hadnt occurred to him
that there was any special significance in it. He believed that 
170 The Great Gatsby
Mrs. Wilson had been running away from her husband,
rather than trying to stop any particular car.
How could she of been like that?
Shes a deep one, said Wilson, as if that answered the
question. Ah-h-h
He began to rock again and Michaelis stood twisting the
leash in his hand.
Maybe you got some friend that I could telephone for,
George?
This was a forlorn hopehe was almost sure that Wilson
had no friend: there was not enough of him for his wife. He
was glad a little later when he noticed a change in the room,
a blue quickening by the window, and realized that dawn
wasnt far off. About five oclock it was blue enough outside
to snap off the light.
Wilsons glazed eyes turned out to the ashheaps, where
small grey clouds took on fantastic shape and scurried here
and there in the faint dawn wind.
I spoke to her, he muttered, after a long silence. I told
her she might fool me but she couldnt fool God. I took her
to the window With an effort he got up and walked to
the rear window and leaned with his face pressed against
it, and I said God knows what youve been doing, everything
youve been doing. You may fool me but you cant
fool God! 
Standing behind him Michaelis saw with a shock that he
was looking at the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg which had
just emerged pale and enormous from the dissolving night.
God sees everything, repeated Wilson.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 171
Thats an advertisement, Michaelis assured him. Something
made him turn away from the window and look back
into the room. But Wilson stood there a long time, his face
close to the window pane, nodding into the twilight.
By six oclock Michaelis was worn out and grateful for
the sound of a car stopping outside. It was one of the watchers
of the night before who had promised to come back so
he cooked breakfast for three which he and the other man
ate together. Wilson was quieter now and Michaelis went
home to sleep; when he awoke four hours later and hurried
back to the garage Wilson was gone.
His movementshe was on foot all the timewere afterward
traced to Port Roosevelt and then to Gads Hill
where he bought a sandwich that he didnt eat and a cup
of coffee. He must have been tired and walking slowly for
he didnt reach Gads Hill until noon. Thus far there was
no difficulty in accounting for his timethere were boys
who had seen a man acting sort of crazy and motorists at
whom he stared oddly from the side of the road. Then for
three hours he disappeared from view. The police, on the
strength of what he said to Michaelis, that he had a way of
finding out, supposed that he spent that time going from
garage to garage thereabouts inquiring for a yellow car. On
the other hand no garage man who had seen him ever came
forwardand perhaps he had an easier, surer way of finding
out what he wanted to know. By half past two he was
in West Egg where he asked someone the way to Gatsbys
house. So by that time he knew Gatsbys name.
At two oclock Gatsby put on his bathing suit and left 
172 The Great Gatsby
word with the butler that if any one phoned word was to be
brought to him at the pool. He stopped at the garage for a
pneumatic mattress that had amused his guests during the
summer, and the chauffeur helped him pump it up. Then he
gave instructions that the open car wasnt to be taken out
under any circumstancesand this was strange because
the front right fender needed repair.
Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started for the pool.
Once he stopped and shifted it a little, and the chauffeur
asked him if he needed help, but he shook his head and in a
moment disappeared among the yellowing trees.
No telephone message arrived but the butler went without
his sleep and waited for it until four oclockuntil long
after there was any one to give it to if it came. I have an idea
that Gatsby himself didnt believe it would come and perhaps
he no longer cared. If that was true he must have felt
that he had lost the old warm world, paid a high price for
living too long with a single dream. He must have looked
up at an unfamiliar sky through frightening leaves and
shivered as he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and
how raw the sunlight was upon the scarcely created grass. A
new world, material without being real, where poor ghosts,
breathing dreams like air, drifted fortuitously about  like
that ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward him through the
amorphous trees.
The chauffeurhe was one of Wolfshiems protgs
heard the shotsafterward he could only say that he hadnt
thought anything much about them. I drove from the station
directly to Gatsbys house and my rushing anxiously 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 173
up the front steps was the first thing that alarmed any one.
But they knew then, I firmly believe. With scarcely a word
said, four of us, the chauffeur, butler, gardener and I, hurried
down to the pool.
There was a faint, barely perceptible movement of the
water as the fresh flow from one end urged its way toward
the drain at the other. With little ripples that were hardly
the shadows of waves, the laden mattress moved irregularly
down the pool. A small gust of wind that scarcely corrugated
the surface was enough to disturb its accidental course
with its accidental burden. The touch of a cluster of leaves
revolved it slowly, tracing, like the leg of compass, a thin red
circle in the water.
It was after we started with Gatsby toward the house that
the gardener saw Wilsons body a little way off in the grass,
and the holocaust was complete.
174 The Great Gatsby
Chapter 9
After two years I remember the rest of that day, and that
night and the next day, only as an endless drill of police
and photographers and newspaper men in and out of
Gatsbys front door. A rope stretched across the main gate
and a policeman by it kept out the curious, but little boys
soon discovered that they could enter through my yard and
there were always a few of them clustered open-mouthed
about the pool. Someone with a positive manner, perhaps
a detective, used the expression mad man as he bent over
Wilsons body that afternoon, and the adventitious authority
of his voice set the key for the newspaper reports next
morning.
Most of those reports were a nightmaregrotesque, circumstantial,
eager and untrue. When Michaeliss testimony
at the inquest brought to light Wilsons suspicions of his wife
I thought the whole tale would shortly be served up in racy
pasquinadebut Catherine, who might have said anything,
didnt say a word. She showed a surprising amount of character
about it toolooked at the coroner with determined
eyes under that corrected brow of hers and swore that her
sister had never seen Gatsby, that her sister was completely
happy with her husband, that her sister had been into no
mischief whatever. She convinced herself of it and cried
into her handkerchief as if the very suggestion was more 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 175
than she could endure. So Wilson was reduced to a man
deranged by grief in order that the case might remain in
its simplest form. And it rested there.
But all this part of it seemed remote and unessential. I
found myself on Gatsbys side, and alone. From the moment
I telephoned news of the catastrophe to West Egg village,
every surmise about him, and every practical question, was
referred to me. At first I was surprised and confused; then,
as he lay in his house and didnt move or breathe or speak
hour upon hour it grew upon me that I was responsible, because
no one else was interestedinterested, I mean, with
that intense personal interest to which every one has some
vague right at the end.
I called up Daisy half an hour after we found him, called
her instinctively and without hesitation. But she and Tom
had gone away early that afternoon, and taken baggage with
them.
Left no address?
No.
Say when theyd be back?
No.
Any idea where they are? How I could reach them?
I dont know. Cant say.
I wanted to get somebody for him. I wanted to go into
the room where he lay and reassure him: Ill get somebody
for you, Gatsby. Dont worry. Just trust me and Ill get somebody
for you
Meyer Wolfshiems name wasnt in the phone book. The
butler gave me his office address on Broadway and I called 
176 The Great Gatsby
Information, but by the time I had the number it was long
after five and no one answered the phone.
Will you ring again?
Ive rung them three times.
Its very important.
Sorry. Im afraid no ones there.
I went back to the drawing room and thought for an instant
that they were chance visitors, all these official people
who suddenly filled it. But as they drew back the sheet and
looked at Gatsby with unmoved eyes, his protest continued
in my brain.
Look here, old sport, youve got to get somebody for me.
Youve got to try hard. I cant go through this alone.
Some one started to ask me questions but I broke away
and going upstairs looked hastily through the unlocked
parts of his deskhed never told me definitely that his parents
were dead. But there was nothingonly the picture of
Dan Cody, a token of forgotten violence staring down from
the wall.
Next morning I sent the butler to New York with a letter
to Wolfshiem which asked for information and urged him
to come out on the next train. That request seemed superfluous
when I wrote it. I was sure hed start when he saw the
newspapers, just as I was sure thered be a wire from Daisy
before noonbut neither a wire nor Mr. Wolfshiem arrived,
no one arrived except more police and photographers and
newspaper men. When the butler brought back Wolfshiems
answer I began to have a feeling of defiance, of scornful solidarity
between Gatsby and me against them all.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 177
Dear Mr. Carraway. This has been one of the most terrible
shocks of my life to me I hardly can believe it that it is true
at all. Such a mad act as that man did should make us all
think. I cannot come down now as I am tied up in some very
important business and cannot get mixed up in this thing
now. If there is anything I can do a little later let me know in a
letter by Edgar. I hardly know where I am when I hear about
a thing like this and am completely knocked down and out.
Yours truly
MEYER WOLFSHIEM
and then hasty addenda beneath:
Let me know about the funeral etc do not know his family at
all.
When the phone rang that afternoon and Long Distance
said Chicago was calling I thought this would be Daisy at
last. But the connection came through as a mans voice, very
thin and far away.
This is Slagle speaking....
Yes? The name was unfamiliar.
Hell of a note, isnt it? Get my wire?
There havent been any wires.
Young Parkes in trouble, he said rapidly. They picked
him up when he handed the bonds over the counter. They
got a circular from New York giving em the numbers just
five minutes before. What dyou know about that, hey? You
never can tell in these hick towns
178 The Great Gatsby
Hello! I interrupted breathlessly. Look herethis isnt
Mr. Gatsby. Mr. Gatsbys dead.
There was a long silence on the other end of the wire,
followed by an exclamation  then a quick squawk as the
connection was broken.
I think it was on the third day that a telegram signed
Henry C. Gatz arrived from a town in Minnesota. It said
only that the sender was leaving immediately and to postpone
the funeral until he came.
It was Gatsbys father, a solemn old man very helpless
and dismayed, bundled up in a long cheap ulster against
the warm September day. His eyes leaked continuously with
excitement and when I took the bag and umbrella from his
hands he began to pull so incessantly at his sparse grey
beard that I had difficulty in getting off his coat. He was
on the point of collapse so I took him into the music room
and made him sit down while I sent for something to eat.
But he wouldnt eat and the glass of milk spilled from his
trembling hand.
I saw it in the Chicago newspaper, he said. It was all in
the Chicago newspaper. I started right away.
I didnt know how to reach you.
His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the
room.
It was a mad man, he said. He must have been mad.
Wouldnt you like some coffee? I urged him.
I dont want anything. Im all right now, Mr.
Carraway.
Well, Im all right now. Where have they got Jimmy?
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 179
I took him into the drawing-room, where his son lay, and
left him there. Some little boys had come up on the steps
and were looking into the hall; when I told them who had
arrived they went reluctantly away.
After a little while Mr. Gatz opened the door and came
out, his mouth ajar, his face flushed slightly, his eyes leaking
isolated and unpunctual tears. He had reached an age
where death no longer has the quality of ghastly surprise,
and when he looked around him now for the first time and
saw the height and splendor of the hall and the great rooms
opening out from it into other rooms his grief began to be
mixed with an awed pride. I helped him to a bedroom upstairs;
while he took off his coat and vest I told him that all
arrangements had been deferred until he came.
I didnt know what youd want, Mr. Gatsby
Gatz is my name.
Mr. Gatz. I thought you might want to take the body
west.
He shook his head.
Jimmy always liked it better down East. He rose up to his
position in the East. Were you a friend of my boys, Mr.?
We were close friends.
He had a big future before him, you know. He was only a
young man but he had a lot of brain power here.
He touched his head impressively and I nodded.
If hed of lived hed of been a great man. A man like
James J. Hill. Hed of helped build up the country.
Thats true, I said, uncomfortably.
He fumbled at the embroidered coverlet, trying to take it 
180 The Great Gatsby
from the bed, and lay down stifflywas instantly asleep.
That night an obviously frightened person called up
and demanded to know who I was before he would give his
name.
This is Mr. Carraway, I said.
Oh He sounded relieved. This is Klipspringer.
I was relieved too for that seemed to promise another
friend at Gatsbys grave. I didnt want it to be in the papers
and draw a sightseeing crowd so Id been calling up a few
people myself. They were hard to find.
The funerals tomorrow, I said. Three oclock, here at
the house. I wish youd tell anybody whod be interested.
Oh, I will, he broke out hastily. Of course Im not likely
to see anybody, but if I do.
His tone made me suspicious.
Of course youll be there yourself.
Well, Ill certainly try. What I called up about is
Wait a minute, I interrupted. How about saying youll
come?
Well, the fact isthe truth of the matter is that Im staying
with some people up here in Greenwich and they rather
expect me to be with them tomorrow. In fact theres a sort
of picnic or something. Of course Ill do my very best to get
away.
I ejaculated an unrestrained Huh! and he must have
heard me for he went on nervously:
What I called up about was a pair of shoes I left there. I
wonder if itd be too much trouble to have the butler send
them on. You see theyre tennis shoes and Im sort of help-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 181
less without them. My address is care of B. F.
I didnt hear the rest of the name because I hung up the
receiver.
After that I felt a certain shame for Gatsbyone gentleman
to whom I telephoned implied that he had got what
he deserved. However, that was my fault, for he was one of
those who used to sneer most bitterly at Gatsby on the courage
of Gatsbys liquor and I should have known better than
to call him.
The morning of the funeral I went up to New York to see
Meyer Wolfshiem; I couldnt seem to reach him any other
way. The door that I pushed open on the advice of an elevator
boy was marked The Swastika Holding Company and
at first there didnt seem to be any one inside. But when Id
shouted Hello several times in vain an argument broke out
behind a partition and presently a lovely Jewess appeared
at an interior door and scrutinized me with black hostile
eyes.
Nobodys in, she said. Mr. Wolfshiems gone to Chicago.
The first part of this was obviously untrue for someone
had begun to whistle The Rosary, tunelessly, inside.
Please say that Mr. Carraway wants to see him.
I cant get him back from Chicago, can I?
At this moment a voice, unmistakably Wolfshiems called
Stella! from the other side of the door.
Leave your name on the desk, she said quickly. Ill give
it to him when he gets back.
But I know hes there.
182 The Great Gatsby
She took a step toward me and began to slide her hands
indignantly up and down her hips.
You young men think you can force your way in here any
time, she scolded. Were getting sickantired of it. When I
say hes in Chicago, hes in ChiCAgo.
I mentioned Gatsby.
Ohh! She looked at me over again. Will you just
what was your name?
She vanished. In a moment Meyer Wolfshiem stood solemnly
in the doorway, holding out both hands. He drew me
into his office, remarking in a reverent voice that it was a sad
time for all of us, and offered me a cigar.
My memory goes back to when I first met him, he said.
A young major just out of the army and covered over with
medals he got in the war. He was so hard up he had to keep
on wearing his uniform because he couldnt buy some regular
clothes. First time I saw him was when he come into
Winebrenners poolroom at Forty-third Street and asked
for a job. He hadnt eat anything for a couple of days. Come
on have some lunch with me, I sid. He ate more than four
dollars worth of food in half an hour.
Did you start him in business? I inquired.
Start him! I made him.
Oh.
I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter. I
saw right away he was a fine appearing, gentlemanly young
man, and when he told me he was an Oggsford I knew I
could use him good. I got him to join up in the American
Legion and he used to stand high there. Right off he did 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 183
some work for a client of mine up to Albany. We were so
thick like that in everything He held up two bulbous fingers
always together.
I wondered if this partnership had included the Worlds
Series transaction in 1919.
Now hes dead, I said after a moment. You were his
closest friend, so I know youll want to come to his funeral
this afternoon.
Id like to come.
Well, come then.
The hair in his nostrils quivered slightly and as he shook
his head his eyes filled with tears.
I cant do itI cant get mixed up in it, he said.
Theres nothing to get mixed up in. Its all over now.
When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in
it in any way. I keep out. When I was a young man it was
differentif a friend of mine died, no matter how, I stuck
with them to the end. You may think thats sentimental but
I mean itto the bitter end.
I saw that for some reason of his own he was determined
not to come, so I stood up.
Are you a college man? he inquired suddenly.
For a moment I thought he was going to suggest a gonnegtion
but he only nodded and shook my hand.
Let us learn to show our friendship for a man when he is
alive and not after he is dead, he suggested. After that my
own rule is to let everything alone.
When I left his office the sky had turned dark and I got
back to West Egg in a drizzle. After changing my clothes I 
184 The Great Gatsby
went next door and found Mr. Gatz walking up and down
excitedly in the hall. His pride in his son and in his sons
possessions was continually increasing and now he had
something to show me.
Jimmy sent me this picture. He took out his wallet with
trembling fingers. Look there.
It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the corners
and dirty with many hands. He pointed out every detail to
me eagerly. Look there! and then sought admiration from
my eyes. He had shown it so often that I think it was more
real to him now than the house itself.
Jimmy sent it to me. I think its a very pretty picture. It
shows up well.
Very well. Had you seen him lately?
He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the
house I live in now. Of course we was broke up when he run
off from home but I see now there was a reason for it. He
knew he had a big future in front of him. And ever since he
made a success he was very generous with me.
He seemed reluctant to put away the picture, held it for
another minute, lingeringly, before my eyes. Then he returned
the wallet and pulled from his pocket a ragged old
copy of a book called Hopalong Cassidy.
Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy. It
just shows you.
He opened it at the back cover and turned it around for
me to see. On the last fly-leaf was printed the word SCHEDULE,
and the date September 12th, 1906. And underneath:
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 185
Rise from bed     . 6.00 A.M.
Dumbbell exercise and wall-scaling   6.15-6.30 A.M.
Study electricity, etc     7.15-8.15 A.M.
Work        8.30-4.30 P.M.
Baseball and sports    . 4.30-5.00 P.M.
Practice elocution, poise and how to attain it 5.00-6.00 P.M.
Study needed inventions   . . 7.00-9.00 P.M.
GENERAL RESOLVES
No wasting time at Shafters or [a name, indecipherable]
No more smokeing or chewing
Bath every other day
Read one improving book or magazine per week
Save $5.00 [crossed out] $3.00 per week
Be better to parents
I come across this book by accident, said the old man. It
just shows you, dont it?
It just shows you.
Jimmy was bound to get ahead. He always had some resolves
like this or something. Do you notice what hes got
about improving his mind? He was always great for that. He
told me I et like a hog once and I beat him for it.
He was reluctant to close the book, reading each item
aloud and then looking eagerly at me. I think he rather expected
me to copy down the list for my own use.
A little before three the Lutheran minister arrived from
Flushing and I began to look involuntarily out the windows
for other cars. So did Gatsbys father. And as the time passed 
186 The Great Gatsby
and the servants came in and stood waiting in the hall, his
eyes began to blink anxiously and he spoke of the rain in a
worried uncertain way. The minister glanced several times
at his watch so I took him aside and asked him to wait for
half an hour. But it wasnt any use. Nobody came.
About five oclock our procession of three cars reached
the cemetery and stopped in a thick drizzle beside the
gatefirst a motor hearse, horribly black and wet, then Mr.
Gatz and the minister and I in the limousine, and, a little
later, four or five servants and the postman from West Egg
in Gatsbys station wagon, all wet to the skin. As we started
through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and
then the sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy
ground. I looked around. It was the man with owl-eyed
glasses whom I had found marvelling over Gatsbys books
in the library one night three months before.
Id never seen him since then. I dont know how he knew
about the funeral or even his name. The rain poured down
his thick glasses and he took them off and wiped them to see
the protecting canvas unrolled from Gatsbys grave.
I tried to think about Gatsby then for a moment but he
was already too far away and I could only remember, without
resentment, that Daisy hadnt sent a message or a flower.
Dimly I heard someone murmur Blessed are the dead that
the rain falls on, and then the owl-eyed man said Amen to
that, in a brave voice.
We straggled down quickly through the rain to the cars.
Owl-Eyes spoke to me by the gate.
I couldnt get to the house, he remarked.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 187
Neither could anybody else.
Go on! He started. Why, my God! they used to go there
by the hundreds.
He took off his glasses and wiped them again outside and
in.
The poor son-of-a-bitch, he said.
One of my most vivid memories is of coming back west
from prep school and later from college at Christmas time.
Those who went farther than Chicago would gather in the
old dim Union Station at six oclock of a December evening
with a few Chicago friends already caught up into their own
holiday gayeties to bid them a hasty goodbye. I remember the
fur coats of the girls returning from Miss This or Thats and
the chatter of frozen breath and the hands waving overhead
as we caught sight of old acquaintances and the matchings
of invitations: Are you going to the Ordways? the Herseys?
the Schultzes? and the long green tickets clasped tight in
our gloved hands. And last the murky yellow cars of the
Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad looking cheerful
as Christmas itself on the tracks beside the gate.
When we pulled out into the winter night and the real
snow, our snow, began to stretch out beside us and twinkle
against the windows, and the dim lights of small Wisconsin
stations moved by, a sharp wild brace came suddenly into
the air. We drew in deep breaths of it as we walked back
from dinner through the cold vestibules, unutterably aware
of our identity with this country for one strange hour before
we melted indistinguishably into it again.
Thats my middle westnot the wheat or the prairies or 
188 The Great Gatsby
the lost Swede towns but the thrilling, returning trains of
my youth and the street lamps and sleigh bells in the frosty
dark and the shadows of holly wreaths thrown by lighted
windows on the snow. I am part of that, a little solemn with
the feel of those long winters, a little complacent from growing
up in the Carraway house in a city where dwellings are
still called through decades by a familys name. I see now
that this has been a story of the West, after allTom and
Gatsby, Daisy and Jordan and I, were all Westerners, and
perhaps we possessed some deficiency in common which
made us subtly unadaptable to Eastern life.
Even when the East excited me most, even when I was
most keenly aware of its superiority to the bored, sprawling,
swollen towns beyond the Ohio, with their interminable
inquisitions which spared only the children and the very
oldeven then it had always for me a quality of distortion.
West Egg especially still figures in my more fantastic
dreams. I see it as a night scene by El Greco: a hundred
houses, at once conventional and grotesque, crouching
under a sullen, overhanging sky and a lustreless moon. In
the foreground four solemn men in dress suits are walking
along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies a drunken
woman in a white evening dress. Her hand, which dangles
over the side, sparkles cold with jewels. Gravely the men
turn in at a housethe wrong house. But no one knows the
womans name, and no one cares.
After Gatsbys death the East was haunted for me like
that, distorted beyond my eyes power of correction. So
when the blue smoke of brittle leaves was in the air and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 189
the wind blew the wet laundry stiff on the line I decided to
come back home.
There was one thing to be done before I left, an awkward,
unpleasant thing that perhaps had better have been
let alone. But I wanted to leave things in order and not just
trust that obliging and indifferent sea to sweep my refuse
away. I saw Jordan Baker and talked over and around what
had happened to us together and what had happened afterward
to me, and she lay perfectly still listening in a big
chair.
She was dressed to play golf and I remember thinking
she looked like a good illustration, her chin raised a little,
jauntily, her hair the color of an autumn leaf, her face the
same brown tint as the fingerless glove on her knee. When
I had finished she told me without comment that she was
engaged to another man. I doubted that though there were
several she could have married at a nod of her head but I
pretended to be surprised. For just a minute I wondered if
I wasnt making a mistake, then I thought it all over again
quickly and got up to say goodbye.
Nevertheless you did throw me over, said Jordan suddenly.
You threw me over on the telephone. I dont give a
damn about you now but it was a new experience for me
and I felt a little dizzy for a while.
We shook hands.
Oh, and do you remember she added, a conversation
we had once about driving a car?
Whynot exactly.
You said a bad driver was only safe until she met an-
190 The Great Gatsby
other bad driver? Well, I met another bad driver, didnt I?
I mean it was careless of me to make such a wrong guess. I
thought you were rather an honest, straightforward person.
I thought it was your secret pride.
Im thirty, I said. Im five years too old to lie to myself
and call it honor.
She didnt answer. Angry, and half in love with her, and
tremendously sorry, I turned away.
One afternoon late in October I saw Tom Buchanan. He
was walking ahead of me along Fifth Avenue in his alert,
aggressive way, his hands out a little from his body as if to
fight off interference, his head moving sharply here and
there, adapting itself to his restless eyes. Just as I slowed up
to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning
into the windows of a jewelry store. Suddenly he saw me
and walked back holding out his hand.
Whats the matter, Nick? Do you object to shaking hands
with me?
Yes. You know what I think of you.
Youre crazy, Nick, he said quickly. Crazy as hell. I dont
know whats the matter with you.
Tom, I inquired, what did you say to Wilson that afternoon?
He stared at me without a word and I knew I had guessed
right about those missing hours. I started to turn away but
he took a step after me and grabbed my arm.
I told him the truth, he said. He came to the door while
we were getting ready to leave and when I sent down word
that we werent in he tried to force his way upstairs. He was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 191
crazy enough to kill me if I hadnt told him who owned the
car. His hand was on a revolver in his pocket every minute
he was in the house He broke off defiantly. What if I
did tell him? That fellow had it coming to him. He threw
dust into your eyes just like he did in Daisys but he was a
tough one. He ran over Myrtle like youd run over a dog and
never even stopped his car.
There was nothing I could say, except the one unutterable
fact that it wasnt true.
And if you think I didnt have my share of suffering
look here, when I went to give up that flat and saw that
damn box of dog biscuits sitting there on the sideboard I sat
down and cried like a baby. By God it was awful
I couldnt forgive him or like him but I saw that what
he had done was, to him, entirely justified. It was all very
careless and confused. They were careless people, Tom and
Daisythey smashed up things and creatures and then retreated
back into their money or their vast carelessness or
whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people
clean up the mess they had made.
I shook hands with him; it seemed silly not to, for I felt
suddenly as though I were talking to a child. Then he went
into the jewelry store to buy a pearl necklaceor perhaps
only a pair of cuff buttonsrid of my provincial squeamishness
forever.
Gatsbys house was still empty when I leftthe grass on
his lawn had grown as long as mine. One of the taxi drivers
in the village never took a fare past the entrance gate
without stopping for a minute and pointing inside; perhaps 
192 The Great Gatsby
it was he who drove Daisy and Gatsby over to East Egg the
night of the accident and perhaps he had made a story about
it all his own. I didnt want to hear it and I avoided him
when I got off the train.
I spent my Saturday nights in New York because those
gleaming, dazzling parties of his were with me so vividly
that I could still hear the music and the laughter faint and
incessant from his garden and the cars going up and down
his drive. One night I did hear a material car there and saw
its lights stop at his front steps. But I didnt investigate.
Probably it was some final guest who had been away at the
ends of the earth and didnt know that the party was over.
On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold
to the grocer, I went over and looked at that huge incoherent
failure of a house once more. On the white steps an obscene
word, scrawled by some boy with a piece of brick, stood out
clearly in the moonlight and I erased it, drawing my shoe
raspingly along the stone. Then I wandered down to the
beach and sprawled out on the sand.
Most of the big shore places were closed now and there
were hardly any lights except the shadowy, moving glow of
a ferryboat across the Sound. And as the moon rose higher
the inessential houses began to melt away until gradually I
became aware of the old island here that flowered once for
Dutch sailors eyesa fresh, green breast of the new world.
Its vanished trees, the trees that had made way for Gatsbys
house, had once pandered in whispers to the last and
greatest of all human dreams; for a transitory enchanted
moment man must have held his breath in the presence of 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 193
this continent, compelled into an aesthetic contemplation
he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the last
time in history with something commensurate to his capacity
for wonder.
And as I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world,
I thought of Gatsbys wonder when he first picked out the
green light at the end of Daisys dock. He had come a long
way to this blue lawn and his dream must have seemed so
close that he could hardly fail to grasp it. He did not know
that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that vast
obscurity beyond the city, where the dark fields of the republic
rolled on under the night.
Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgastic future
that year by year recedes before us. It eluded us then, but
thats no mattertomorrow we will run faster, stretch out
our arms farther. And one fine morning
So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back
ceaselessly into the past.

HomeOrder Now Live Chat Our PricesSamplesContact UsBlog
Cheap Assignment Help Editing starting at $12.95 per page!
Order Now
Search for: 
Search 
Categories
Academic Writing Format
Argumentative Essays
Assignment Help
College Essay Formats
Essay topics
Essay Writing Tips
Persuasive Essays
Research Paper Format
Standard Essay Writing
Uncategorized
Recent Posts
Best Assignment Topics for Economics
Assignment Topics for English Literature
Best Assignment Topics for Environmental Science
How To Write An Assignment Papers
Assignment Writing Service
How to Write the Best College Assignment
August 30, 2015Academic Writing Format, Assignment Help
College assignments are the integral part of the colleges academic requirements. As such, college students are often required to write assignments in various topics. In this regard, it is important for every student to be conversant with the tips involved in writing such assignments. Assignments help students to broaden their knowledge base in various fields. Similarly, assignments help teachers to evaluate their students on whether or not they have mastered what they have been taught in class. However, it is quite challenging to get a conceptualized guide having simple and clear tips that can help students on how to write their assignments effectively. With this respect, this guide will offer simple and care tips on the manner in which students can write great assignments.


college-student-girl

The Most Critical Aspects of Assignments
 Outline

Before writing any assignment, it is necessary for the students to do thorough preparation on how to write a particular assignment. In this case, it is highly recommended that one should write a comprehensive outline for the assignment before starting to write the assignment itself. Such outline should have the major points that need to be discussed in the assignment. This will help one to be focused on the assignment and hence resulting in clearly defined points. Apart from saving time, an outline of the assignment helps one to organize his or her thoughts and facilitates easier literature searches. Additionally, the outline of the assignment help one to create various sections and approximate the appropriate word count for each section.

Introduction

Having written the introduction, one should focus on is writing the introduction. It is worth noting that the introduction is what defines the quality of ones assignment. By reading the introduction, the assignment helps the reader to know in advance what the writer will discuss in the main body. The introduction should have a brief background information, the purpose of the assignment, and a clear and succinct discussion on how the whole assignment is organized. The introduction should be one to two paragraphs long.

Tips on Writing an Assignment

Various practical tips on writing assignments are given below:

Critical thinking  This the necessary characteristic of any academic writing that helps one to write the assignment to the required level and also contributes to the final mark.

Continuity of concepts- One should ensure that there is a continuous flow of ideas between and within paragraphs. By so doing, the assignment will help the reader to follow the logical arguments in the assignment.

Usage of I And you  Academic writing requires the use of impersonal language and thus one should avoid using I and you.

Referencing styles  It is important for one to put cite all the sources used within the text and provide a list of all the sources used at the end of the assignment. The referenced assignment help the reader to know which sources the writer has used.

Use of examples  The writer is required to compare and contrast various sources and objectively identify both their weakness and strengths.

Bullets and numbering  Academic writing requires the use of paragraphs rather than bullets and numbering.

Word count  the writer should ensure that the word count is close to the required word count. As aforementioned, the outline will help one to plan of the word count for each section. The word count of the assignment help the one to know whether the number of pages required have been reached.

Persuasion Essay Students

Writing an Effective Conclusion

The conclusion of ones assignment is a platform to give strong arguments identified in the main body. The three major parts of the conclusion are: stating the aim as well as the context of the assignment; providing a brief summary of the major points; and providing a forward-looking statement regarding the future is the situation under discussion.

Post navigation
? How to Get Free Assignment Help Online Your Assignment Help ?
 Order Assignment Help
HomeOrder NowSamplesLive ChatContact UsOur Prices


 This is a featured article. Click here for more information. Page move-protected
HMS Collingwood (1908)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other ships with the same name, see HMS Collingwood.
HMS Collingwood.jpg
HMS Collingwood at anchor, 1912
History
United Kingdom
Name:	Collingwood
Namesake:	Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, 1st Baron Collingwood
Ordered:	26 October 1907
Builder:	Devonport Royal Dockyard
Laid down:	3 February 1907
Launched:	7 November 1908
Commissioned:	April 1910
Fate:	Sold for scrap, 12 December 1922
General characteristics (as built)
Class and type:	St Vincent-class dreadnought battleship
Displacement:	19,700 long tons (20,000 t) (normal)
Length:	536 ft (163.4 m) (o/a)
Beam:	84 ft 2 in (25.7 m)
Draught:	28 ft (8.5 m)
Installed power:	
24,500 shp (18,300 kW)
18 Yarrow boilers
Propulsion:	4  shafts; 2  steam turbine sets
Speed:	21 knots (39 km/h; 24 mph)
Range:	6,900 nmi (12,800 km; 7,900 mi) at 10 knots (19 km/h; 12 mph)
Complement:	758
Armament:	
5  twin BL 12-inch Mk XI guns
20  single BL 4-inch Mk VII guns
3  18-inch torpedo tubes
Armour:	
Belt: 810 inches (203254 mm)
Bulkheads: 58 inches (127203 mm)
Deck: .753 inches (1976 mm)
Turrets: 11 inches (279 mm)
Barbettes: 510 inches (127254 mm)
Conning tower: 811 in (203279 mm)
HMS Collingwood was a St Vincent-class dreadnought battleship built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century. She spent her whole career assigned to the Home and Grand Fleets and often served as a flagship. Prince Albert (later King George VI) spent several years aboard the ship before and during World War I. At the Battle of Jutland in May 1916, Collingwood was in the middle of the battleline and lightly damaged a German battlecruiser. Other than that battle, and the inconclusive Action of 19 August, her service during the war generally consisted of routine patrols and training in the North Sea. The ship was deemed obsolete after the war; she was reduced to reserve and used as a training ship before being sold for scrap in 1922.
Contents  [hide] 
1	Design and description
1.1	Alterations
2	Construction and career
2.1	World War I
2.1.1	Battle of Jutland
2.1.2	Subsequent activity
3	Relics
4	Footnotes
5	Citations
6	Bibliography
7	External links
Design and description[edit]

Right elevation and plan of the first generation of British dreadnoughts from the 1912 edition of Jane's Fighting Ships
The design of the St Vincent class was derived from that of the previous Bellerophon class, with a slight increase in size, armour and more powerful guns, among other more minor changes. Collingwood had an overall length of 536 feet (163.4 m), a beam of 84 feet 2 inches (25.7 m),[1] and a normal draught of 28 feet (8.5 m).[2] She displaced 19,700 long tons (20,000 t) at normal load and 22,800 long tons (23,200 t) at deep load. In 1911 her crew numbered 758 officers and enlisted men.[3]
Collingwood was powered by two sets of Parsons direct-drive steam turbines, each driving two shafts, using steam from eighteen Yarrow boilers. The turbines were rated at 24,500 shp (18,300 kW) and intended to reach a maximum speed of 21 knots (39 km/h; 24 mph). During her full-power, eight-hour sea trials on 17 January 1910, the ship only reached a top speed of 20.62 knots (38.19 km/h; 23.73 mph) from 26,789 shp (19,977 kW). She had a range of 6,900 nautical miles (12,800 km; 7,900 mi) at a cruising speed of 10 knots (19 km/h; 12 mph).[4]
The St Vincent class was equipped with ten breech-loading (BL) 12-inch Mk XI guns in five twin-gun turrets, three along the centreline and the remaining two as wing turrets. The secondary, or anti-torpedo boat, armament comprised twenty BL 4-inch Mk VII guns. Two of these guns were each installed on the roofs of the fore and aft centreline turrets and the wing turrets in unshielded mounts, and the other ten were positioned in the superstructure. All guns were in single mounts.[3] The ships were also fitted with three 18-inch torpedo tubes, one on each broadside and the third in the stern.[2]
The St Vincent-class ships had a waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour (KC) that was 10 inches (254 mm) thick between the fore and aftmost barbettes, reducing to a thickness of 2 inches (51 mm) before it reached the ships' ends. Above this was a strake of armour 8 inches (203 mm) thick. Transverse bulkheads 5 to 8 inches (127 to 203 mm) inches thick terminated the thickest parts of the waterline and upper armour belts once they reached the outer portions of the endmost barbettes.[5]
The three centreline barbettes were protected by armour 9 inches (229 mm) thick above the main deck that thinned to 5 inches (127 mm) below it. The wing barbettes were similar except that they had 10 inches of armour on their outer faces. The gun turrets had 11-inch (279 mm) faces and sides with 3-inch (76 mm) roofs. The three armoured decks ranged in thicknesses from .75 to 3 inches (19 to 76 mm). The front and sides of the forward conning tower were protected by 11-inch plates, although the rear and roof were 8 inches and 3 inches thick, respectively.[6]
Alterations[edit]
The guns on the forward turret roof were removed in 191112 and the upper forward pair of guns in the superstructure were removed in 191314. In addition, gun shields were fitted to all guns in the superstructure and the bridge structure was enlarged around the base of the forward tripod mast. During the first year of the war, a fire-control director was installed high on the forward tripod mast. Around the same time, the base of the forward superstructure was rebuilt to house four 4-inch guns and the turret-top guns were removed, which reduced her secondary armament to a total of fourteen guns. In addition, a pair of 3-inch anti-aircraft (AA) guns were added.[7]
By April 1917, Collingwood mounted thirteen 4-inch anti-torpedo boat guns as well as single 4-inch and 3-inch AA guns. Approximately 50 long tons (51 t) of additional deck armour had been added after the Battle of Jutland. Before the end of the war the AA guns were moved from the deckhouse between the aft turrets to the stern and the stern torpedo tube was removed. In 1918, a high-angle rangefinder was fitted and flying-off platforms were installed on the roofs of the fore and aft turrets.[7]
Construction and career[edit]

Collingwood shortly after completion
Collingwood, named after Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood,[8] was ordered on 26 October 1907.[9] She was laid down at Devonport Royal Dockyard on 3 February 1908, launched on 7 November 1908 and completed in April 1910. Including her armament, the ship's cost is quoted at 1,680,888[3] or 1,731,640.[10]
On 19 April 1910, Collingwood was commissioned and assigned to the 1st Division of the Home Fleet under the command of Captain William Pakenham.[11] She joined other members of the fleet in regular peacetime exercises, and on 11 February 1911 damaged her bottom plating on an uncharted rock off Ferrol. On 24 June the ship was present at the Coronation Fleet Review for King George V at Spithead.[9] Pakenham was relieved by Captain Charles Vaughan-Lee on 1 December.[11] On 1 May 1912, the 1st Division was renamed the 1st Battle Squadron.[9] On 22 June, Vaughan-Lee was transferred to the battleship Bellerophon and Captain James Ley assumed command; Vice-Admiral Stanley Colville hoisted his flag in Collingwood as commander of the 1st Battle Squadron.[11] The ship participated in the Parliamentary Naval Review on 9 July at Spithead before beginning a refit late in the year. In March 1913, Collingwood and the 1st Battle Squadron undertook a port visit to Cherbourg, France.[12] Midshipman Prince Albert (later King George VI) was assigned to the ship on 15 September 1913.[13] Collingwood hosted Albert's older brother, Edward, Prince of Wales, during a short cruise on 18 April 1914. She became a private ship when Colville hauled down his flag on 22 June.[12]
World War I[edit]
Between 17 and 20 July, Collingwood took part in a test mobilisation and fleet review. Arriving in Portland on 27 July, she was ordered to proceed with the rest of the Home Fleet to Scapa Flow two days later to safeguard the fleet from a possible German surprise attack.[14] In August 1914, following the outbreak of World War I, the Home Fleet was reorganised as the Grand Fleet, and placed under the command of Admiral John Jellicoe.[15] Most of it was briefly based (22 October to 3 November) at Lough Swilly, Ireland, while the defences at Scapa were strengthened. On the evening of 22 November 1914, the Grand Fleet conducted a fruitless sweep in the southern half of the North Sea; Iron Duke stood with the main body in support of Vice-Admiral David Beatty's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron. The fleet was back in port in Scapa Flow by 27 November.[16] The 1st Battle Squadron cruised north-west of the Shetland Islands and conducted gunnery practice on 812 December. Four days later, the Grand Fleet sortied during the German raid on Scarborough, Hartlepool and Whitby, but failed to make contact with the High Seas Fleet. Collingwood and the rest of the Grand Fleet conducted another sweep of the North Sea on 2527 December.[17]

The 1st Battle Squadron at sea, April 1915
The Grand Fleet, including Collingwood, conducted gunnery drills on 1013 January 1915 west of the Orkneys and Shetlands. On the evening of 23 January, the bulk of the Grand Fleet sailed in support of Beatty's battlecruisers, but Collingwood and the rest of the fleet did not participate in the ensuing Battle of Dogger Bank the following day.[18] The ship sailed for Portsmouth Royal Dockyard on 2 February to begin a brief refit and returned on 18 February.[19] On 710 March, the Grand Fleet conducted a sweep in the northern North Sea, during which it conducted training manoeuvres. Another such cruise took place on 1619 March.[20] From 25 March to 14 April 1915, Rear-Admiral Hugh Evan-Thomas temporarily hoisted his flag aboard Collingwood.[21] On 11 April, the Grand Fleet conducted a patrol in the central North Sea and returned to port on 14 April; another patrol in the area took place on 1719 April, followed by gunnery drills off the Shetlands on 2021 April.[22]
The Grand Fleet conducted sweeps into the central North Sea on 1719 May and 2931 May without encountering any German vessels. During 1114 June the fleet conducted gunnery practice and battle exercises west of the Shetlands.[23] Collingwood was briefly docked at Invergordon from 23 to 25 June. King George V inspected the ship on 8 July,[21] and the Grand Fleet conducted training off the Shetlands beginning three days later.[24] Rear-Admiral Ernest Gaunt temporarily used Collingwood as his flagship from 24 August to 24 September and from 10 December to 16 January 1916.[25] On 25 September 1915, the fleet went on another cruise in the northern end of the North Sea and conducted gunnery drills. Throughout the rest of the month, the Grand Fleet conducted numerous training exercises. The ship, together with the majority of the Grand Fleet, conducted another sweep into the North Sea from 13 to 15 October. Almost three weeks later, Collingwood participated in another fleet training operation west of Orkney during 25 November.[26] On 21 November, she sailed for Devonport Royal Dockyard for a minor overhaul and arrived back at Scapa on 9 December.[27]
The Grand Fleet departed for a cruise in the North Sea on 26 February 1916; Jellicoe had intended to use the Harwich Force to sweep the Heligoland Bight, but bad weather prevented operations in the southern North Sea. As a result, the operation was confined to the northern end of the sea. Another sweep began on 6 March, but had to be abandoned the following day as the weather grew too severe for the escorting destroyers. On the night of 25 March, Collingwood and the rest of the fleet sailed from Scapa Flow to support Beatty's battlecruisers and other light forces raiding the German Zeppelin base at Tondern. By the time the Grand Fleet approached the area on 26 March, the British and German forces had already disengaged and a strong gale threatened the light craft, so the fleet was ordered to return to base. On 21 April, the Grand Fleet conducted a demonstration off Horns Reef to distract the Germans while the Russian Navy relaid its defensive minefields in the Baltic Sea. The fleet returned to Scapa Flow on 24 April and refuelled before proceeding south in response to intelligence reports that the Germans were about to launch a raid on Lowestoft. The Grand Fleet arrived in the area after the Germans had withdrawn. On 24 May, the fleet conducted another demonstration off Horns Reef to keep German attention focused on the North Sea.[28]
Battle of Jutland[edit]
The British fleet sailed from northern Britain to the east while the Germans sailed from Germany in the south; the opposing fleets met off the Danish coast.
Maps showing the manoeuvres of the British (blue) and German (red) fleets on 31 May  1 June 1916
Main article: Battle of Jutland
In an attempt to lure out and destroy a portion of the Grand Fleet, the German High Seas Fleet, composed of 16 dreadnoughts, 6 pre-dreadnoughts, 6 light cruisers, and 31 torpedo boats, departed the Jade early on the morning of 31 May. The fleet sailed in concert with Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper's five battlecruisers and supporting cruisers and torpedo boats. The Royal Navy's Room 40 had intercepted and decrypted German radio traffic containing plans of the operation. The Admiralty ordered the Grand Fleet, totalling some 28 dreadnoughts and 9 battlecruisers, to sortie the night before to cut off and destroy the High Seas Fleet.[29] Collingwood was the eighteenth ship from the head of the battle line after the Grand Fleet deployed for battle.[12]
The initial action was fought primarily by the British and German battlecruiser formations in the afternoon, but by 18:00,[Note 1] the Grand Fleet approached the scene. Fifteen minutes later, Jellicoe gave the order to turn and deploy the fleet for action. The transition from cruising formation caused congestion with the rear divisions, forcing many ships to reduce speed to 8 knots (15 km/h; 9.2 mph) to avoid colliding with each other. During the first stage of the general engagement, Collingwood fired eight salvos from her main guns at the crippled light cruiser SMS Wiesbaden from 18:32, although the number of hits made, if any, is unknown. Her secondary armament then engaged the destroyer SMS G42, which was attempting to come to Wiesbaden's assistance, but failed to hit her. At 19:15 Collingwood fired two salvoes of high explosive (HE) shells at the battlecruiser SMS Derfflinger, hitting her target once before she disappeared into the mist. The shell detonated in the German ship's sickbay and damaged the surrounding superstructure. Shortly afterwards, during the attack of the German destroyers around 19:20, the ship fired her main armament at a damaged destroyer without success and dodged two torpedoes that missed by 10 yards (9.1 m) behind and 30 yards (27 m) in front. This was the last time she fired her guns during the battle.[30]
Following the German destroyer attack, the High Seas Fleet disengaged, and Collingwood and the rest of the Grand Fleet saw no further action in the battle. This was, in part, due to confusion aboard the fleet flagship over the exact location and course of the German fleet; without this information, Jellicoe could not bring his fleet to action. At 21:30, the Grand Fleet began to reorganise into its night-time cruising formation. Early on the morning of 1 June, the Grand Fleet combed the area, looking for damaged German ships, but after spending several hours searching, they found none. Collingwood fired a total of 52 armour-piercing, capped and 32 HE shells from her main armament and 35 four-inch shells during the battle.[31] Prince Albert was a sub-lieutenant commanding the forward turret during the battle and sat in the open on the turret roof during a lull in the action.[32]
Subsequent activity[edit]
After the battle the ship was transferred to the 4th Battle Squadron under the command of Vice-Admiral Sir Doveton Sturdee, who inspected Collingwood on 8 August 1916.[33] On the evening of 18 August, the Grand Fleet put to sea in response to a message deciphered by Room 40 that indicated that the High Seas Fleet, minus II Squadron, would be leaving harbour that night. The German objective was to bombard Sunderland on 19 August, based on extensive reconnaissance conducted by Zeppelins and U-boats. The Grand Fleet sailed with 29 dreadnoughts and 6 battlecruisers while the Germans mustered 18 dreadnoughts and 2 battlecruisers. Throughout the next day, Jellicoe and Vice-Admiral Reinhard Scheer, commander of the High Seas Fleet, received conflicting intelligence; after reaching the location in the North Sea where they expected to encounter the High Seas Fleet, the British turned north in the erroneous belief that they had entered a minefield. Scheer turned south again, then steered south-eastward to pursue a lone British battle squadron sighted by an airship, which was in fact the Harwich Force of cruisers and destroyers under Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt. Realising their mistake, the Germans changed course for home. The only contact came in the evening when Tyrwhitt sighted the High Seas Fleet but was unable to achieve an advantageous attack position before dark, and broke off contact. The British and the German fleets returned home; the British lost two cruisers to U-boat attacks, and one German dreadnought had been torpedoed. After returning to port, Jellicoe issued an order that prohibited risking the fleet in the southern half of the North Sea due to the overwhelming risk from mines and U-boats unless the odds of defeating the High Seas Fleet in a decisive engagement were favourable.[34]
Collingwood received a brief refit at Rosyth in early September before rejoining the Grand Fleet. On 29 October Sturdee came aboard to present the ship with her battle honour, "Jutland 1916". Captain Wilmot Nicholson briefly assumed command on 1 December before transferring to the new battlecruiser Glorious upon his relief by Captain Cole Fowler on 26 March 1917. Together with the rest of the 4th Battle Squadron, Collingwood put to sea for tactical exercises for a few days in February 1917. The ship was present at Scapa Flow when her sister ship Vanguard's magazines exploded on 9 July and her crew recovered the bodies of three men killed in the explosion. In January 1918, Collingwood and other of the older dreadnoughts cruised off the coast of Norway for several days, possibly to provide distant cover for a convoy to Norway.[35] Along with the rest of the Grand Fleet, she sortied on the afternoon of 23 April after radio transmissions revealed that the High Seas Fleet was at sea after a failed attempt to intercept the regular British convoy to Norway. The Germans were too far ahead of the British, and no shots were fired.[36] By early November, Collingwood was at Invergordon to receive a brief refit in the floating dock based there, and missed the surrender of the High Seas Fleet on the 21st. She was slightly damaged on 23 November while attempting to come alongside the oiler RFA Ebonol.[37]
In January 1919, Collingwood was transferred to Devonport and assigned to the Reserve Fleet. Upon the dissolution of the Grand Fleet on 18 March, the Reserve Fleet was redesignated the Third Fleet and Collingwood became its flagship. She became a tender to HMS Vivid on 1 October and served as a gunnery and wireless telegraphy (W/T) training ship. The W/T school was transferred to Glorious on 1 June 1920 and the gunnery duties followed in early August; Collingwood returned to the reserve. She became a boys' training ship on 22 September 1921 until she was paid off on 31 March 1922. Collingwood was sold to John Cashmore Ltd for scrap on 12 December and arrived at Newport, Wales, on 3 March 1923 to be broken up.[37]
Relics[edit]
Battle ensigns flown by the ship during Jutland survive at the shore establishment of the same name and at the Roedean School in East Sussex.[38]
Footnotes[edit]
Jump up ^ The times used in this section are in UT, one hour behind CET, which is often used in German works.
Citations[edit]
Jump up ^ Burt, pp. 7576
^ Jump up to: a b Preston, p. 125
^ Jump up to: a b c Burt, p. 76
Jump up ^ Burt, pp. 76, 80
Jump up ^ Burt, pp. 76, 78; Parkes, p. 503
Jump up ^ Burt, pp. 76, 78; Parkes, p. 504
^ Jump up to: a b Burt, p. 81
Jump up ^ Silverstone, p. 223
^ Jump up to: a b c Burt, p. 86
Jump up ^ Parkes, p. 503
^ Jump up to: a b c Brady, Part One, p. 29
^ Jump up to: a b c Burt, p. 88
Jump up ^ Judd, p. 28
Jump up ^ Massie, p. 19
Jump up ^ Gardiner & Gray, p. 32
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 16365
Jump up ^ Brady, Part One, p. 32; Jellicoe, pp. 172, 179, 18384
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 190, 19496
Jump up ^ Brady, Part One, p. 32
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, p. 206
^ Jump up to: a b Brady, Part One, p. 33
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 21112
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 217, 21819, 22122
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, p. 228
Jump up ^ Brady, Part One, pp. 3334
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 243, 246, 250, 253
Jump up ^ Brady, Part One, p. 34
Jump up ^ Jellicoe, pp. 271, 275, 27980, 284, 28690
Jump up ^ Tarrant, pp. 5455, 5758
Jump up ^ Campbell, pp. 37, 116, 146, 157, 205, 208, 212, 214, 22930
Jump up ^ Campbell, pp. 256, 274, 30910, 346, 348, 358
Jump up ^ Gordon, pp. 454, 459
Jump up ^ Brady, Part Two, p. 19
Jump up ^ Massie, pp. 68284
Jump up ^ Brady, Part Two, pp. 1922
Jump up ^ Massie, p. 748
^ Jump up to: a b Brady, Part Two, pp. 2324
Jump up ^ Gordon, p. 417
Bibliography[edit]
Burt, R. A. (1986). British Battleships of World War One. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 0-87021-863-8.
Brady, Mark (May 2014). Part One. "HMS Collingwood War Record". Warship. London: World Ship Society (176): 2935. ISSN 0966-6958.
Brady, Mark (September 2014). Part Two. "HMS Collingwood War Record". Warship. London: World Ship Society (177): 1924. ISSN 0966-6958.
Campbell, N. J. M. (1986). Jutland: An Analysis of the Fighting. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 0-87021-324-5.
Gardiner, Robert & Gray, Randal, eds. (1984). Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships: 19061921. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 0-87021-907-3.
Gordon, Andrew (2012). The Rules of the Game: Jutland and British Naval Command. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-336-9.
Jellicoe, John (1919). The Grand Fleet, 19141916: Its Creation, Development, and Work. New York: George H. Doran Company. OCLC 13614571.
Judd, Denis (1982). King George VI: 18951952. London: Michael Joseph. ISBN 0-7181-2184-8.
Massie, Robert K. (2003). Castles of Steel: Britain, Germany, and the Winning of the Great War at Sea. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-679-45671-6.
Parkes, Oscar (1990) [1957]. British Battleships (reprint ed.). Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-55750-075-4.
Preston, Antony (1972). Battleships of World War I: An Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Battleships of All Nations 19141918. New York: Galahad Books. ISBN 0-88365-300-1.
Silverstone, Paul H. (1984). Directory of the World's Capital Ships. New York: Hippocrene Books. ISBN 0-88254-979-0.
Tarrant, V. E. (1999) [1995]. Jutland: The German Perspective: A New View of the Great Battle, 31 May 1916 (reprint ed.). London: Brockhampton Press. ISBN 1-86019-917-8.
External links[edit]
icon	Battleships portal
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to HMS Collingwood (ship, 1908).
Maritimequest HMS Collingwood Photo Gallery
[hide] v t e
St Vincent-class battleships
St Vincent Collingwood Vanguard
Preceded by: Bellerophon class Followed by: HMS Neptune
List of dreadnought battleships of the Royal Navy
Categories: St. Vincent-class battleshipsWorld War I battleships of the United Kingdom1908 shipsPlymouth-built ships
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
Dansk
Espaol
?????
Franais
???
Norsk bokml
Suomi
Ti?ng Vi?t
Edit links
This page was last modified on 8 November 2016, at 22:35.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki


The Home Fleet was a fleet of the Royal Navy that operated in the United Kingdom's territorial waters from 1902 with intervals until 1967. Before the First World War, it consisted of the four Port Guard ships; during the First World War, it comprised some of the older ships of the Royal Navy; and during the Second World War, it was the Royal Navy's main battle force in European waters.
Contents  [hide] 
1	Pre-First World War
2	Inter-war period
3	Second World War
4	Post-Second World War
5	Notes
6	Sources
7	External links
Pre-First World War[edit]
On 1 October 1902, the Admiral Superintendent Naval Reserves, then Vice-Admiral Gerard Noel, was given the additional appointment of Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet, and allotted a rear-admiral to serve under him as commander of the Home Squadron.[1] "... the nucleus of the Home Fleet would consist of the four Port Guard ships, which would be withdrawn from their various scattered dockyards and turned into a unified and permanent sea-going command  the Home Squadron  based on Portland. Also under the direction of the commander-in-chief of the Home Fleet would be the Coast Guard ships, which would continue to be berthed for the most part in their respective district harbours in order to carry out their local duties, but would join the Home Squadron for sea work at least three times per year, at which point the assembled force  the Home Squadron and the Coast Guard vessels  would be known collectively as the Home Fleet."[2] Rear-Admiral George Atkinson-Willes was Second-in-Command of the Home Fleet, with his flag in the battleship HMS Empress of India, at this time.[3] In May 1903 Noel was succeeded as Commander-in-Chief by Vice-Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson.[4]
On 14 December 1904, the Channel Fleet was re-styled the Atlantic Fleet and the Home Fleet became the Channel Fleet.[5] In 1907, the Home Fleet was reformed with Vice-Admiral Francis Bridgeman in command, succeeded by Admiral Sir William May in 1909. Bridgeman took command again in 1911, and in the same year was succeeded by Admiral Sir George Callaghan. On 4 August 1914, as the First World War was breaking out, John Jellicoe was ordered to take command of the Fleet, which by his appointment order was renamed the Grand Fleet.
Commanders in-Chief during the pre-war period were:
Vice-Admiral Sir Gerard Noel (19021903)
Vice-Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson (19031904)
Note: There was no Home Fleet between 1904 and 1907
Vice-Admiral Sir Francis Bridgeman (19071909)
Vice-Admiral Sir William May (19091911)
Vice-Admiral Sir Francis Bridgeman (March 1911November 1911)
Vice-Admiral Sir George Callaghan (19111914)
Inter-war period[edit]
When the Grand Fleet was disbanded in April 1919, the more powerful ships were reformed into the Atlantic Fleet and the older ships were reformed into the "Home Fleet"; this arrangement lasted until Autumn 1919, when the ships of the Home Fleet became the Reserve Fleet.
The name "Home Fleet" was resurrected in March 1932, as the new name for the Atlantic Fleet, following the Invergordon Mutiny. The Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet in 1933 was Admiral Sir John Kelly. The Home Fleet comprised the flagship Nelson leading a force that included the 2nd Battle Squadron (five more battleships), the Battlecruiser Squadron (Hood and Renown), the 2nd Cruiser Squadron (Vice-Admiral Edward Astley-Rushton), CB, CMG aboard Dorsetshire (three cruisers), three destroyer flotillas (27), a submarine flotilla (six), two aircraft carriers and associated vessels.[6]
Commanders in-Chief during the inter-war period were:
Admiral Sir John Kelly (19321933)
Admiral Sir William Boyle (19331935)
Admiral Sir Roger Backhouse (19351938)
Second World War[edit]
The Home Fleet was the Royal Navy's main battle force in European waters during the Second World War. On 3 September 1939, under Admiral Forbes flying his flag in Nelson at Scapa Flow, it consisted of the 2nd Battle Squadron, the Battle Cruiser Squadron, 18th Cruiser Squadron, Rear-Admiral, Destroyers, Rear-Admiral, Submarines (2nd Submarine Flotilla, Dundee, 6th Submarine Flotilla, Blyth, Northumberland), Vice-Admiral, Aircraft Carriers (Vice-Admiral L.V. Wells, with Ark Royal, Furious, and Pegasus), and the Orkney and Shetlands force.[7] Its chief responsibility was to keep Nazi Germany's Kriegsmarine from breaking out of the North Sea. For this purpose, the First World War base at Scapa Flow was reactivated as it was well placed for interceptions of ships trying to run the blockade.
The two most surprising losses of the Home Fleet during the early part of the war were the sinking of the old battleship Royal Oak by the German submarine U-47 while supposedly safe in Scapa Flow, and the loss of the pride of the Navy, the battlecruiser Hood, to the German battleship Bismarck.
The operational areas of the Home Fleet were not circumscribed, and units were detached to other zones quite freely. However, the southern parts of the North Sea and the English Channel were made separate commands for light forces, and the growing intensity of the Battle of the Atlantic led to the creation of Western Approaches Command. Only with the destruction of the German battleship Tirpitz in 1944 did the Home Fleet assume a lower priority, and most of its heavy units were withdrawn to be sent to the Far East.
Commanders-in-Chief during the Second World War were:[8]
Admiral Sir Charles Forbes (19391940)
Admiral Sir John Tovey (19401942)
Admiral Sir Bruce Fraser (19421944)
Admiral Sir Henry Moore (14 June 1944  24 November 1945)[9]
Post-Second World War[edit]
After the Second World War, the Home Fleet took back all of its peacetime responsibilities for the Royal Navy forces in home waters and also in the North and South Atlantic. With the Cold War, greater emphasis was placed on protecting the North Atlantic from the Soviet Union in concert with other countries as part of NATO. Admiral Sir Rhoderick McGrigor supervised combined Western Union exercises involving ships from the British, French, and Dutch navies in JuneJuly 1949. Admiral McGrigor flew his flag from the aircraft carrier Implacable. Also taking part in the exercises were Victorious and Anson, along with cruisers and destroyers. During the exercise, the combined force paid a visit to Mount's Bay in Cornwall from 30 June-4 July 1949.[10]
Admiral Sir Philip Vian, who was Commander-in-Chief from 1950-1952, flew his flag in Vanguard.[11] In late 1951, Theseus joined the fleet as flagship of the 2nd Aircraft Carrier Squadron.[12]
The Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet, gained an additional NATO responsibility as Commander-in-Chief, Eastern Atlantic, as part of SACLANT, when the NATO military command structure was established in 1953 at the Northwood Headquarters in northwest London. The Commander-in-Chief Home Fleet still flew his flag however in Tyne at Portsmouth. During Exercise Mainbrace in 1952, NATO naval forces came together for the first time to practice the defence of northern Europe; Denmark and Norway. The resulting McMahon Act difficulties caused by potential British control of the United States Navy's attack carriers armed with nuclear weapons led to the creation of a separate Striking Fleet Atlantic, directly responsible to the commander of the U.S. Navy's Atlantic Fleet, in his NATO position as SACLANT, by the end of 1952.[13]
The submarine tender Maidstone was the fleet's flagship in 1956. In 1960, C-in-C Home Fleet moved to Northwood, and in 1966 the NATO Channel Command (a post also held by C-in-C Home Fleet) moved to Northwood from Portsmouth.[14]
In April 1963, the naval unit at the Northwood Headquarters was commissioned as HMS Warrior under the command of the then Captain of the Fleet. The Home Fleet was amalgamated with the Mediterranean Fleet in 1967. With its area of responsibility greatly increased and no longer being just responsible for the defence of home waters of the UK, the name of the fleet was changed to the Western Fleet, consigning the famous, historic name of the Home Fleet to history.

William Davis (Royal Navy officer)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Sir William Davis
Born	11 October 1901
Shimla, India
Died	29 October 1987 (aged 86)
Gloucester, Gloucestershire
Allegiance	United Kingdom United Kingdom
Service/branch	Naval Ensign of the United Kingdom.svg Royal Navy
Years of service	19171960
Rank	Admiral
Commands held	HMS Mauritius
Home Fleet
Battles/wars	World War I
World War II
Awards	Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath
Distinguished Service Order
Admiral Sir William Wellclose Davis GCB DSO (11 October 1901  29 October 1987) was a Royal Navy officer who went on to be Vice Chief of the Naval Staff.
Naval career[edit]
Educated at Summer Fields School in Oxford, the Royal Naval College at Osborne and the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth,[1] Davis joined the Royal Navy in 1917 towards the end of World War I.[2]
He also served in World War II initially as Executive Officer on the battlecruiser HMS Hood and then, from 1940, as Deputy Director of Plans at the Admiralty and then, from 1943, as Commander of the cruiser HMS Mauritius in which capacity he was involved in the Sicily landings, the Normandy landings and the action at Audierne Bay.[2]
After the War he was made Director of Underwater Weapons at the Admiralty and then, from 1948, Chief of Staff to the Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet.[2] He became Naval Secretary in 1950 and Flag Officer, Second in Command of the Mediterranean Fleet in 1952.[2] He went on to be Vice Chief of the Naval Staff in 1954 and Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet and Commander-in-Chief, Eastern Atlantic Area in 1958.[2] He was First and Principal Naval Aide-de-camp to the Queen from 1959 to 1960.[2] He retired in 1960.[2]
Family[edit]
On 28 April 1934 he married Lady Gertrude Elizabeth Phipps, daughter of Constantine Phipps, 3rd Marquess of Normanby; they went on to have two sons and two daughters

rack-before-detect
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
In radar technology and similar fields, track-before-detect (TBD) is a concept according to which a signal is tracked before declaring it a target. In this approach, the sensor data about a tentative target are integrated over time and may yield detection in cases when signals from any particular time instance are too weak against clutter (low signal-to-noise ratio) to register a detected target.[1]
The TBD approach may be applied both for pure detection when the tentative target displays a very small amount of apparent motion, as well as for actual motion tracking. In the first case the problem is considerably simpler, both in terms of the amount of calculation and the complexity of algorithms

Signal-to-noise ratio
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For "signal-to-noise ratio" in statistics, see Effect size.
For other uses, see Signal to Noise (disambiguation).
Part of a series on
Antennas
Montage of four professional US omnidirectional base-station antennas
Common types[show]
Components[show]
Systems[show]
Safety and regulation[show]
Radiation sources / regions[show]
Characteristics[hide]
Array gain Directivity Efficiency Electrical length Equivalent radius Factor Friis transmission equation Gain Height Radiation pattern Radiation resistance Radio propagation Radio spectrum Signal-to-noise ratio Spurious emission
Techniques[show]
v t e
Signal-to-noise ratio (abbreviated SNR or S/N) is a measure used in science and engineering that compares the level of a desired signal to the level of background noise. It is defined as the ratio of signal power to the noise power, often expressed in decibels. A ratio higher than 1:1 (greater than 0 dB) indicates more signal than noise. While SNR is commonly quoted for electrical signals, it can be applied to any form of signal (such as isotope levels in an ice core or biochemical signaling between cells).
The signal-to-noise ratio, the bandwidth, and the channel capacity of a communication channel are connected by the ShannonHartley theorem.
Signal-to-noise ratio is sometimes used informally to refer to the ratio of useful information to false or irrelevant data in a conversation or exchange. For example, in online discussion forums and other online communities, off-topic posts and spam are regarded as "noise" that interferes with the "signal" of appropriate discussion.[1]
Contents  [hide] 
1	Definition
1.1	Decibels
1.2	Dynamic range
1.3	Difference from conventional power
2	Alternative definition
3	SNR for various modulation systems
3.1	Amplitude modulation
3.2	Frequency modulation
4	Improving SNR in practice
5	Digital signals
5.1	Fixed point
5.2	Floating point
6	Optical SNR
7	Types and abbreviations
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Definition[edit]
Signal-to-noise ratio is defined as the ratio of the power of a signal (meaningful information) and the power of background noise (unwanted signal):
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR} ={\frac {P_{\mathrm {signal} }}{P_{\mathrm {noise} }}},} 
\mathrm{SNR} = \frac{P_\mathrm{signal}}{P_\mathrm{noise}},
where P is average power. Both signal and noise power must be measured at the same or equivalent points in a system, and within the same system bandwidth.
If the variance of the signal and noise are known, and the signal is zero-mean:[2]
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR} ={\frac {\sigma _{\mathrm {signal} }^{2}}{\sigma _{\mathrm {noise} }^{2}}}.} 
\mathrm{SNR} = \frac{\sigma^2_\mathrm{signal}}{\sigma^2_\mathrm{noise}}.
If the signal and the noise are measured across the same impedance, then the SNR can be obtained by calculating the square of the amplitude ratio:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR} ={\frac {P_{\mathrm {signal} }}{P_{\mathrm {noise} }}}=\left({\frac {A_{\mathrm {signal} }}{A_{\mathrm {noise} }}}\right)^{2},} 
\mathrm{SNR} = \frac{P_\mathrm{signal}}{P_\mathrm{noise}} = \left ( \frac{A_\mathrm{signal}}{A_\mathrm{noise} } \right )^2,
where A is root mean square (RMS) amplitude (for example, RMS voltage).
Decibels[edit]
Because many signals have a very wide dynamic range, signals are often expressed using the logarithmic decibel scale. Based upon the definition of decibel, signal and noise may be expressed in decibels (dB) as
{\displaystyle P_{\mathrm {signal,dB} }=10\log _{10}\left(P_{\mathrm {signal} }\right)} P_{{\mathrm  {signal,dB}}}=10\log _{{10}}\left(P_{{\mathrm  {signal}}}\right)
and
{\displaystyle P_{\mathrm {noise,dB} }=10\log _{10}\left(P_{\mathrm {noise} }\right).} P_{{\mathrm  {noise,dB}}}=10\log _{{10}}\left(P_{{\mathrm  {noise}}}\right).
In a similar manner, SNR may be expressed in decibels as
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} =10\log _{10}\left(\mathrm {SNR} \right).} {\mathrm  {SNR_{{dB}}}}=10\log _{{10}}\left({\mathrm  {SNR}}\right).
Using the definition of SNR
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} =10\log _{10}\left({\frac {P_{\mathrm {signal} }}{P_{\mathrm {noise} }}}\right).} {\mathrm  {SNR_{{dB}}}}=10\log _{{10}}\left({\frac  {P_{{\mathrm  {signal}}}}{P_{{\mathrm  {noise}}}}}\right).
Using the quotient rule for logarithms
{\displaystyle 10\log _{10}\left({\frac {P_{\mathrm {signal} }}{P_{\mathrm {noise} }}}\right)=10\log _{10}\left(P_{\mathrm {signal} }\right)-10\log _{10}\left(P_{\mathrm {noise} }\right).} 
10 \log_{10} \left ( \frac{P_\mathrm{signal}}{P_\mathrm{noise}} \right ) = 10 \log_{10} \left ( P_\mathrm{signal} \right ) - 10 \log_{10} \left ( P_\mathrm{noise} \right ).
Substituting the definitions of SNR, signal, and noise in decibels into the above equation results in an important formula for calculating the signal to noise ratio in decibels, when the signal and noise are also in decibels:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} ={P_{\mathrm {signal,dB} }-P_{\mathrm {noise,dB} }}.} {\mathrm  {SNR_{{dB}}}}={P_{{\mathrm  {signal,dB}}}-P_{{\mathrm  {noise,dB}}}}.
In the above formula, P is measured in units of power, such as Watts or miliWatts, and signal-to-noise ratio is a pure number.
However, when the signal and noise are measured in Volts or Amperes, which are measures of amplitudes, they must be squared to be proportionate to power as shown below:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} =10\log _{10}\left[\left({\frac {A_{\mathrm {signal} }}{A_{\mathrm {noise} }}}\right)^{2}\right]=20\log _{10}\left({\frac {A_{\mathrm {signal} }}{A_{\mathrm {noise} }}}\right)=\left({A_{\mathrm {signal,dB} }-A_{\mathrm {noise,dB} }}\right).} 
\mathrm{SNR_{dB}} = 10 \log_{10} \left [ \left ( \frac{A_\mathrm{signal}}{A_\mathrm{noise}} \right )^2 \right ] = 20 \log_{10} \left ( \frac{A_\mathrm{signal}}{A_\mathrm{noise}} \right )  = \left ( {A_\mathrm{signal,dB} - A_\mathrm{noise,dB}}\right ).
Dynamic range[edit]
The concepts of signal-to-noise ratio and dynamic range are closely related. Dynamic range measures the ratio between the strongest un-distorted signal on a channel and the minimum discernible signal, which for most purposes is the noise level. SNR measures the ratio between an arbitrary signal level (not necessarily the most powerful signal possible) and noise. Measuring signal-to-noise ratios requires the selection of a representative or reference signal. In audio engineering, the reference signal is usually a sine wave at a standardized nominal or alignment level, such as 1 kHz at +4 dBu (1.228 VRMS).
SNR is usually taken to indicate an average signal-to-noise ratio, as it is possible that (near) instantaneous signal-to-noise ratios will be considerably different. The concept can be understood as normalizing the noise level to 1 (0 dB) and measuring how far the signal 'stands out'.
[note 1]
Difference from conventional power[edit]
In physics, the average power of an AC signal is defined as the average value of voltage times current; for resistive (non-reactive) circuits, where voltage and current are in phase, this is equivalent to the product of the rms voltage and current:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {P} =V_{\mathrm {rms} }I_{\mathrm {rms} }}   \mathrm{P} = V_\mathrm{rms}I_\mathrm{rms}
{\displaystyle \mathrm {P} ={\frac {V_{\mathrm {rms} }^{2}}{R}}=I_{\mathrm {rms} }^{2}R} 
\mathrm{P}= \frac{V_\mathrm{rms}^{2}}{R} = I_\mathrm{rms}^{2} R
But in signal processing and communication, one usually assumes that {\displaystyle R=1\Omega } R=1 \Omega[citation needed] so that factor is usually not included while measuring power or energy of a signal. This may cause some confusion among readers, but the resistance factor is not significant for typical operations performed in signal processing, or for computing power ratios. For most cases, the power of a signal would be considered to be simply
{\displaystyle \mathrm {P} =V_{\mathrm {rms} }^{2}={\frac {A^{2}}{2}}} 
\mathrm{P}= V_\mathrm{rms}^{2} = \frac{A^{2}}{2}
where 'A' is the amplitude[clarification needed] of the AC signal.
Alternative definition[edit]
An alternative definition of SNR is as the reciprocal of the coefficient of variation, i.e., the ratio of mean to standard deviation of a signal or measurement:[4][5]
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR} ={\frac {\mu }{\sigma }}} 
 \mathrm{SNR} = \frac{\mu}{\sigma}
where {\displaystyle \mu } \mu  is the signal mean or expected value and {\displaystyle \sigma } \sigma  is the standard deviation of the noise, or an estimate thereof.[note 2] Notice that such an alternative definition is only useful for variables that are always non-negative (such as photon counts and luminance). Thus it is commonly used in image processing,[6][7][8][9] where the SNR of an image is usually calculated as the ratio of the mean pixel value to the standard deviation of the pixel values over a given neighborhood. Sometimes SNR is defined as the square of the alternative definition above.
The Rose criterion (named after Albert Rose) states that an SNR of at least 5 is needed to be able to distinguish image features at 100% certainty. An SNR less than 5 means less than 100% certainty in identifying image details.[5][10]
Yet another alternative, very specific and distinct definition of SNR is employed to characterize sensitivity of imaging systems; see Signal-to-noise ratio (imaging).
Related measures are the "contrast ratio" and the "contrast-to-noise ratio".
SNR for various modulation systems[edit]
Amplitude modulation[edit]
Channel signal-to-noise ratio is given by
{\displaystyle \mathrm {(SNR)_{C,AM}} ={\frac {A_{C}^{2}(1+k_{a}^{2}P)}{2WN_{0}}}} {\mathrm  {(SNR)_{{C,AM}}}}={\frac  {A_{C}^{2}(1+k_{a}^{2}P)}{2WN_{0}}}
where W is the bandwidth and {\displaystyle k_{a}} k_a is modulation index
Output signal-to-noise ratio (of AM receiver) is given by
{\displaystyle \mathrm {(SNR)_{O,AM}} ={\frac {A_{c}^{2}k_{a}^{2}P}{2WN_{0}}}} \mathrm{(SNR)_{O,AM}} = \frac{A_c^2 k_a^2 P} {2 W N_0}
Frequency modulation[edit]
Channel signal-to-noise ratio is given by
{\displaystyle \mathrm {(SNR)_{C,FM}} ={\frac {A_{c}^{2}}{2WN_{0}}}} \mathrm{(SNR)_{C,FM}} = \frac{A_c^2} {2 W N_0}
Output signal-to-noise ratio is given by
{\displaystyle \mathrm {(SNR)_{O,FM}} ={\frac {A_{c}^{2}k_{f}^{2}P}{2N_{0}W^{3}}}} \mathrm{(SNR)_{O,FM}} = \frac{A_c^2 k_f^2 P} {2 N_0 W^3}
Improving SNR in practice[edit]

Recording of the noise of a thermogravimetric analysis device that is poorly isolated from a mechanical point of view; the middle of the curve shows a lower noise, due to a lesser surrounding human activity at night.
All real measurements are disturbed by noise. This includes electronic noise, but can also include external events that affect the measured phenomenon  wind, vibrations, gravitational attraction of the moon, variations of temperature, variations of humidity, etc., depending on what is measured and of the sensitivity of the device. It is often possible to reduce the noise by controlling the environment. Otherwise, when the characteristics of the noise are known and are different from the signals, it is possible to filter it or to process the signal.
For example, it is sometimes possible to use a lock-in amplifier to modulate and confine the signal within a very narrow bandwidth and then filter the detected signal to the narrow band where it resides, thereby eliminating most of the broadband noise. When the signal is constant or periodic and the noise is random, it is possible to enhance the SNR by averaging the measurement. In this case the noise goes down as the square root of the number of averaged samples.
Additionally, internal noise of electronic systems can be reduced by low-noise amplifiers.
Digital signals[edit]
When a measurement is digitized, the number of bits used to represent the measurement determines the maximum possible signal-to-noise ratio. This is because the minimum possible noise level is the error caused by the quantization of the signal, sometimes called Quantization noise. This noise level is non-linear and signal-dependent; different calculations exist for different signal models. Quantization noise is modeled as an analog error signal summed with the signal before quantization ("additive noise").
This theoretical maximum SNR assumes a perfect input signal. If the input signal is already noisy (as is usually the case), the signal's noise may be larger than the quantization noise. Real analog-to-digital converters also have other sources of noise that further decrease the SNR compared to the theoretical maximum from the idealized quantization noise, including the intentional addition of dither.
Although noise levels in a digital system can be expressed using SNR, it is more common to use Eb/No, the energy per bit per noise power spectral density.
The modulation error ratio (MER) is a measure of the SNR in a digitally modulated signal.
Fixed point[edit]
See also: Fixed point arithmetic
For n-bit integers with equal distance between quantization levels (uniform quantization) the dynamic range (DR) is also determined.
Assuming a uniform distribution of input signal values, the quantization noise is a uniformly distributed random signal with a peak-to-peak amplitude of one quantization level, making the amplitude ratio 2n/1. The formula is then:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {DR_{dB}} =\mathrm {SNR_{dB}} =20\log _{10}(2^{n})\approx 6.02\cdot n} 
\mathrm{DR_{dB}} = \mathrm{SNR_{dB}} = 20 \log_{10}(2^n) \approx 6.02 \cdot n
This relationship is the origin of statements like "16-bit audio has a dynamic range of 96 dB". Each extra quantization bit increases the dynamic range by roughly 6 dB.
Assuming a full-scale sine wave signal (that is, the quantizer is designed such that it has the same minimum and maximum values as the input signal), the quantization noise approximates a sawtooth wave with peak-to-peak amplitude of one quantization level[11] and uniform distribution. In this case, the SNR is approximately
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} \approx 20\log _{10}(2^{n}{\sqrt {3/2}})\approx 6.02\cdot n+1.761} 
\mathrm{SNR_{dB}} \approx 20 \log_{10} (2^n \sqrt {3/2}) \approx 6.02 \cdot n + 1.761
Floating point[edit]
Floating-point numbers provide a way to trade off signal-to-noise ratio for an increase in dynamic range. For n bit floating-point numbers, with n-m bits in the mantissa and m bits in the exponent:
{\displaystyle \mathrm {DR_{dB}} =6.02\cdot 2^{m}} 
\mathrm{DR_{dB}} = 6.02 \cdot 2^m
{\displaystyle \mathrm {SNR_{dB}} =6.02\cdot (n-m)} 
\mathrm{SNR_{dB}} = 6.02 \cdot (n-m)
Note that the dynamic range is much larger than fixed-point, but at a cost of a worse signal-to-noise ratio. This makes floating-point preferable in situations where the dynamic range is large or unpredictable. Fixed-point's simpler implementations can be used with no signal quality disadvantage in systems where dynamic range is less than 6.02m. The very large dynamic range of floating-point can be a disadvantage, since it requires more forethought in designing algorithms.[12]
[note 3] [note 4]
Optical SNR[edit]
Optical signals have a carrier frequency that is much higher than the modulation frequency (about 200 THz and more). This way the noise covers a bandwidth that is much wider than the signal itself. The resulting signal influence relies mainly on the filtering of the noise. To describe the signal quality without taking the receiver into account, the optical SNR (OSNR) is used. The OSNR is the ratio between the signal power and the noise power in a given bandwidth. Most commonly a reference bandwidth of 0.1 nm is used. This bandwidth is independent of the modulation format, the frequency and the receiver. For instance an OSNR of 20 dB/0.1 nm could be given, even the signal of 40 GBit DPSK would not fit in this bandwidth. OSNR is measured with an optical spectrum analyzer.
Types and abbreviations[edit]
Signal to noise ratio may be abbreviated as SNR and less commonly as S/N. PSNR stands for Peak signal-to-noise ratio. GSNR stands for Geometric Signal-to-Noise Ratio. SINR is the Signal-to-noise-plus-interference ratio.
Noise (electronics)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Electronic noise)
This article is about fundamental noise processes. For noise arising from outside sources, see electromagnetic compatibility and electromagnetic interference.

Analog display of random fluctuations in voltage in pink noise.
In electronics, noise is a random fluctuation in an electrical signal, a characteristic of all electronic circuits.[1] Noise generated by electronic devices varies greatly as it is produced by several different effects. Thermal noise is unavoidable at non-zero temperature (see fluctuation-dissipation theorem), while other types depend mostly on device type (such as shot noise,[1][2] which needs a steep potential barrier) or manufacturing quality and semiconductor defects, such as conductance fluctuations, including 1/f noise.
In communication systems, noise is an error or undesired random disturbance of a useful information signal. The noise is a summation of unwanted or disturbing energy from natural and sometimes man-made sources. Noise is, however, typically distinguished from interference,[a] for example in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) and signal-to-noise plus interference ratio (SNIR) measures. Noise is also typically distinguished from distortion, which is an unwanted systematic alteration of the signal waveform by the communication equipment, for example in the signal-to-noise and distortion ratio (SINAD) and total harmonic distortion plus noise (THD+N).
While noise is generally unwanted, it can serve a useful purpose in some applications, such as random number generation or dither.
Contents  [hide] 
1	Noise types
1.1	Thermal noise
1.2	Shot noise
1.3	Flicker noise
1.4	Burst noise
1.5	Transit-time noise
2	Coupled noise
2.1	Intermodulation noise
2.2	Crosstalk
2.3	Interference
2.4	Atmospheric noise (static noise)
2.5	Industrial noise
2.6	Extraterrestrial noise
2.6.1	Solar noise
2.6.2	Cosmic noise
2.7	Reduction of electromagnetic noise coupling
3	Quantification
4	Dither
5	See also
6	Notes
7	References
8	Further reading
9	External links
Noise types[edit]
Thermal noise[edit]
Main article: JohnsonNyquist noise
JohnsonNyquist noise[1] (sometimes thermal, Johnson or Nyquist noise) is unavoidable, and generated by the random thermal motion of charge carriers (usually electrons), inside an electrical conductor, which happens regardless of any applied voltage.
Thermal noise is approximately white, meaning that its power spectral density is nearly equal throughout the frequency spectrum. The amplitude of the signal has very nearly a Gaussian probability density function. A communication system affected by thermal noise is often modeled as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
The root mean square (RMS) voltage due to thermal noise {\displaystyle v_{n}} v_{n}, generated in a resistance R (ohms) over bandwidth ?f (hertz), is given by
{\displaystyle v_{n}={\sqrt {4k_{B}TR\Delta f}}} v_{{n}}={\sqrt  {4k_{B}TR\Delta f}}
where kB is Boltzmann's constant (joules per kelvin) and T is the resistor's absolute temperature (kelvin).
As the amount of thermal noise generated depends upon the temperature of the circuit, very sensitive circuits such as preamplifiers in radio telescopes are sometimes cooled in liquid nitrogen to reduce the noise level.
Shot noise[edit]
Main article: Shot noise
If electrons flow across a barrier, then they have discrete arrival times. Those discrete arrivals exhibit shot noise. The output of a shot noise generator is easily set by the current. Typically, the barrier in a diode is used.[3]
Shot noise in electronic devices results from unavoidable random statistical fluctuations of the electric current when the charge carriers (such as electrons) traverse a gap. The current is a flow of discrete charges, and the fluctuation in the arrivals of those charges creates shot noise. Shot noise is similar to the noise created by rain falling on a tin roof. The flow of rain may be relatively constant, but the raindrops arrive discretely.
The root-mean-square value of the shot noise current in is given by the Schottky formula
{\displaystyle i_{n}={\sqrt {2Iq\Delta B}}} i_{n}={\sqrt  {2Iq\Delta B}}
where I is the DC current, q is the charge of an electron, and ?B is the bandwidth in hertz.
The shot noise assumes independent arrivals. Vacuum tubes have shot noise because the electrons randomly leave the cathode and arrive at the anode (plate). A tube may not exhibit the full shot noise effect: the presence of a space charge tends to smooth out the arrival times (and thus reduce the randomness of the current).
Conductors and resistors typically do not exhibit shot noise because the electrons thermalize and move diffusively within the material; the electrons do not have discrete arrivial times. Shot noise has been demonstrated in mesoscopic resistors when the size of the resistive element becomes shorter than the electron-phonon scattering length.[4]
Flicker noise[edit]
Main article: Flicker noise
Flicker noise, also known as 1/f noise, is a signal or process with a frequency spectrum that falls off steadily into the higher frequencies, with a pink spectrum. It occurs in almost all electronic devices, and results from a variety of effects, though always related to a direct current.
Burst noise[edit]
Main article: Burst noise
Burst noise consists of sudden step-like transitions between two or more levels (non-Gaussian), as high as several hundred microvolts, at random and unpredictable times. Each shift in offset voltage or current lasts for several milliseconds, and the intervals between pulses tend to be in the audio range (less than 100 Hz), leading to the term popcorn noise for the popping or crackling sounds it produces in audio circuits.
Transit-time noise[edit]
If the time taken by the electrons from traveling from emitter to collector becomes comparable to the period of the signal being amplified, that is, at frequencies above VHF and beyond, so-called transit-time effect takes place and noise input admittance of the transistor increases. From the frequency at which this effect becomes significant it goes on increasing with frequency and quickly dominates over other terms.
Coupled noise[edit]
See also: Electromagnetic compatibility
Energy external of the receiver can couple noise, also by energy conversion. Generally this is done by fundamental interaction, in electronics mainly by inductive coupling and/or capacitive coupling.
Intermodulation noise[edit]
Intermodulation noise is caused when signals of different frequencies share the same non-linear medium.
Crosstalk[edit]
Phenomenon in which a signal transmitted in one circuit or channel of a transmission systems creates undesired interferance onto a signal in another channel.
Interference[edit]
Modification or disruption of a signal travelling along a medium
Atmospheric noise (static noise)[edit]
Main article: Atmospheric noise
This noise is also called static noise and it is the natural source of disturbance caused by lightning discharge in thunderstorm and the natural (electrical) disturbances occurring in nature.
Industrial noise[edit]
Sources such as automobiles, aircraft, ignition electric motors and switching gear, High voltage wires and fluorescent lamps cause industrial noise. These noises are produced by the discharge present in all these operations.
Extraterrestrial noise[edit]
Noise from outside the Earth includes:
Solar noise[edit]
Noise that originates from the Sun is called solar noise. Under normal conditions there is constant radiation from the Sun due to its high temperature. Electrical disturbances such as corona discharges, as well as sunspots can produce additional noise.
Cosmic noise[edit]
Main article: Cosmic noise
Distant stars generate noise called cosmic noise. While these stars are too far away to individually affect terrestrial communications systems, their large number leads to appreciable collective effects. Cosmic noise has been observed in a range from 8 MHz to 1.43 GHz.
Reduction of electromagnetic noise coupling[edit]
In many cases noise found on a signal in a circuit is unwanted. When creating a circuit, one usually wants a true output of what the circuit has accomplished. There are many different noise reduction techniques that can change a noisy altered output signal to a more theoretical output signal.
Faraday cage  A Faraday cage is a good way to reduce the overall noise in a complete circuit. The Faraday cage can be thought of as an enclosure that separates the complete circuit from outside power lines and any other signal that may alter the true signal. A Faraday cage will usually block out most electromagnetic and electrostatic noise.
Capacitive coupling  A current through two resistors, or any other type of conductor, close to each other in a circuit can create unwanted capacitive coupling. If this happens an AC signal from one part of the circuit can be accidentally picked up in another part. The two resistors (conductors) act like a capacitor thus transferring AC signals. There may be other reasons for which capacitive coupling is wanted but then it would not be thought of as electronic noi
Electromagnetic interference (EMI), also called radio-frequency interference (RFI) when in the radio frequency spectrum, is a disturbance generated by an external source that affects an electrical circuit by electromagnetic induction, electrostatic coupling, or conduction.[1] The disturbance may degrade the performance of the circuit or even stop it from functioning. In the case of a data path, these effects can range from an increase in error rate to a total loss of the data.[2] Both man-made and natural sources generate changing electrical currents and voltages that can cause EMI: automobile ignition systems, cell phones, thunderstorms, the Sun, and the Northern Lights. EMI frequently affects AM radios. It can also affect cell phones, FM radios, and televisions.
EMI can be used intentionally for radio jamming, as in electronic warfare.